A standard Turing computation may be visualized as a time-like sequence of
elementary read-write-move operations carried out by one or more “heads” on
“tapes”. The sequence of actions is determined by the initial tape contents
and by a finite Turing program. The specific choice of alphabet, operations
and tapes may influence the time or space complexity of calculations; by the
Church-Turing thesis, however, the associated notion of Turing computabil-
ity is not affected. So we may assume that Turing machines act on tapes whose
cells are indexed by the set ω (= N) of natural numbers 0, 1, . . . and contain 0’s
or 1’s.

An obvious generalization from the perspective of transfinite ordinal theory
is to extend Turing calculations to tapes whose cells are indexed by the class
Ord of all ordinal numbers. Calculations will become (infinite) sequences of ele-
mentary tape operations indexed by ordinals which may be viewed as instances
of time. For successor ordinals (or times) calculations will basically be defined
as for standard Turing machines. At limit ordinals we define the tape contents,
program states and head positions by appropriate limit operations which may
be viewed as inferior limits.

The corresponding notion of ordinal computability obviously extends Tur-
ing computability. By the Church-Turing thesis many operations on natural
numbers are ordinal computable. The ordinal arithmetical operations (addition,
multiplication, exponentiation) and other basic operations on ordinals are also
ordinal computable.
Indeed, the recursive properties of the family of ordinal computable functions
are so strong that the bounded truth predicate
{(α, ϕ, ~x)|α ∈ Ord, ϕ an ∈ -formula, ~x ∈ Lα, Lα  ϕ(~x)}
for G¨odel’s constructible hierarchy L = ⋃
α∈Ord Lα is ordinal computable given
some appropriate coding. As a corollary we obtain the main result characterizing
ordinal computability:
Theorem 1 A set x ⊆ Ord is ordinal computable from finitely many ordinal
parameters if and only if x ∈ L.
2
The implication from left to right will be immediate from the set-theoretical
absoluteness of ordinal computations. The converse requires a careful analysis of
the iterative definition of the constructible hierarchy to show that the iteration
can be carried out by an ordinal Turing machine.
This theorem may be viewed as an analogue of the Church-Turing thesis:
ordinal computability defines a natural and absolute class of sets, and it is stable
with respect to technical variations in its definition.
Theories of transfinite computations which extend Turing computability
have been proposed and studied for some time. Higher recursion theory as
described in the monograph [6] of Gerald Sacks culminates in E-recursion
which defines a computational result {e}(x) for programs e built from basic set
functions applied to arbitrary sets x. The relation of E-computability to con-
structibility is analogous to the statement of Theorem 1. In computer science
various infinitary machines like B¨uchi automata [1] have been defined yield-
ing important applications. The novelty here is in keeping with the original
Turing idea of reading and writing on an unrestricted tape while interpreting
unrestrictedness in the widest sense as set-theoretical unboundedness.
Our work was inspired by the infinite time Turing machines introduced by
Joel D. Hamkins, Jeff Kidder and Andy Lewis [4]. Infinite time Turing
machines use standard tapes indexed by natural numbers but allow infinite
computation sequences. At limit times, tape contents are defined as inferior
limits of previous contents. Inputs and outputs are characteristic functions on
the set ω of all natural numbers and may thus be viewed as real numbers.
The theory of infinite time Turing machines is naturally related to definability
theory over the structure (R, . . .), i.e., to descriptive set theory. In the case of
tapes of arbitrary ordinal length one is lead to consider a theory of arbitrarily
iterated definitions, i.e., constructibility theory