AbstractIn Taiwan, the average prevalence of congenital heart disease (CHD) is 13.08/1000 live births. Most children with CHD die before the age of 5 years; therefore, identifying treatment methods to extend the life of CHD patients is an important issue in clinical practice. The objective of this study is to evaluate the roles of hypoxia‐inducible factor‐1α (HIF‐1α), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), endothelin‐1 (ET‐1), and CD34 in CHD autopsy cases in comparison with autopsy cases without CHD. The study included 19 autopsy cases, which were divided into the following four groups: acyanotic CHD (n = 11), cyanotic CHD (n = 3), CHD associated with chromosomal abnormalities (n = 3), and complex CHD (n = 2). Heart specimens obtained from 10 autopsy cases without CHD were included as controls. Our results indicated that high percentages of HIF‐1α (100%), VEGF (89.5%), iNOS (78.9%), and ET‐1 (84.2%) expressions were observed in CHD autopsy cases and this was found to be significant. HIF‐1α induced by hypoxia could play a potential role in relating downstream gene expressions in CHD patients. Upregulation of VEGF by HIF‐1α could play an important role in triggering angiogenesis to protect myocardial cell survival in a hypoxic microenvironment. Therefore, HIF‐1α could be a significant prognosis marker in CHD and be a prospective candidate in the development of target therapy in cardiovascular diseases.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common defect caused by abnormal cardiac formation in fetuses, with its highest prevalence in Asia. The average incidence rate of CHD in Taiwan is 13.08/1000 live births [1]. Ventricular septal defect (VSD) is the most common defect, followed by atrial septal defect (ASD), patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), pulmonary stenosis, tetralogy of Fallot, and coarctation of the aorta. CHD has also become the leading cause of childhood mortality with an incidence of approximately 1% and most CHD children die before the age of 5 years [2]. To prolong the life of patients with CHD, cardiovascular target therapy is promising for future treatment.
A previous study indicated that hypoxia contributes significantly to some common diseases including CHD at the beginning of life [3]. Hypoxia‐inducible factors (HIFs) are transcription factors that are stabilized mainly in response to decreased oxygen availability. HIFs are composed of two subunits (HIF‐1α and HIF‐1β). HIF‐1α is affected by the oxygen level, whereas HIF‐1β is not. Under conditions of normal oxygen level, HIF‐1α will combine with von Hippel‐Lindau protein, targeted for ubiquitination and later degradation by proteasome. When hypoxia occurs, HIF‐1α does not combine with von Hippel‐Lindau protein but accumulates rapidly and combines with HIF‐1β to form heterodimers, and then activates the downstream genes of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) [4], inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) [5], and endothelin‐1 (ET‐1) expressions [6] in cardiomyocytes and endothelial cells, resulting in an increase of angiogenesis.
VEGF is an endothelial‐specific mitogen and plays an important role in vascular development, angiogenesis, collateral growth, embryonic development, wound healing, tumor growth, inflammatory diseases, extracellular matrix proteolysis, and ischemia. Under hypoxic conditions, VEGF expression increases because HIF‐1α binds to the hypoxic response element in its 5′ flanking region [7] and then induces proliferation, sprouting, migration, and tube formation of endothelial cells.
Nitric oxide (NO) plays an important role as a regulator in the nervous, immune, and cardiovascular systems. In cardiac tissue, basal production of NO is maintained by constitutive expression of endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) and contributes to the regulation of coronary circulation, heart rate, and myocardial contractility [8]. However, NO generated by the inducible form of NO synthase (iNOS) has been implicated in many pathophysiological states leading to myocardial dysfunction. It has also been reported in ischemia/reperfusion injury.
ET‐1 is a potent vasoconstrictor and is produced by vascular endothelial cells. Patients with heart failure have an increased concentration of ET‐1 in plasma. Increased concentration of ET‐1 causes cardiac fibroblast proliferation and recombination of extracellular matrix, besides inducing fibrosis and leading to cardiac dysfunction. ET‐1 receptor antagonists are used in the treatment of pulmonary hypertension [[9], [10]]. Inhibition of these receptors prevents pulmonary vasculature constriction, and thus decreases pulmonary vascular resistance.
In this study, expressions of HIF‐1α, VEGF, iNOS, and ET‐1 in CHD and non‐CHD autopsy cases were investigated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and scored using semiautomated image analysis software. The pathological findings of these maker expressions and their relationships to the specificity in the diagnosis of CHD were also discussed.
This study focused on the autopsy cases of CHD patients in the Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital in Taiwan from January 1975 to October 2014. All cases were fixed in formalin, embedded in paraffin, and stored in the archives of the Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital (Kaohsiung, Taiwan).
In this study, 19 CHD specimens relevant to the abnormal part were collected from a fixed site of the left ventricle and divided into four groups for analysis. The first group consisted of 11 cases of acyanotic CHD (ACHD), which mainly included PDA, VSD, and ASD cases. The second group consisted of three cases of cyanotic CHD (CCHD; 2 cases of left heart hypoplastic syndrome and 1 case of Eisenmenger syndrome). The third group consisted of three cases of CHD associated with chromosomal abnormalities with Trisomy 13, 18, and 21, respectively. The fourth group consisted of two cases with complex CHD. Ten autopsy cases without CHD were included as controls (Table 1). Before IHC, we examined the ventricle tissues histologically and we did not see any fibrosis in these tissues, which were taken relevant to the ischemic part. Therefore, we performed IHC to understand whether there were any ischemic changes in these tissues that could not be distinguished by hematoxylin and eosin stain. Institutional Review Board approval for using these human tissues in this study was given by the Research Ethics Committee of the Kaohsiung Medical Hospital (IRB KMUH‐IRB‐2013287).
The IHC staining was performed on 4‐μm thick paraffin sections. Paraffin sections of all samples were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and autoclave treated at 121°C for 10 minutes in pH 9.0 Dako target retrieval solution (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) to induce antigen retrieval. Endogenous peroxidase in the section was blocked by incubation in 3% hydrogen peroxide for 5 minutes. The sections were incubated (at room temperature for 1 hour) with primary antibody including HIF‐1α (1:200; H‐206, Santa cruz Biotechnology Inc., CA, USA), VEGF (1: 400; A‐20, Santa Cruz), CD34 (1:200; M715, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), iNOS (1:100; ab15323‐500, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, UK), and ET‐1 (1: 200; HPA031976, Sigma Life Science, Singapore). The Dako REAL Envision Detection kit was then applied for 30 minutes. Finally, sections were incubated in 3,3′‐diaminobenzidine for 5 minutes, followed by Mayer's hematoxylin counterstaining and mounting. Negative controls were obtained by replacing the primary antibodies with nonimmune serum.
Stained IHC slides were scanned, inspected, serialized, and digitalized using a panoramic digital slide scanner (3DHISTECH Ltd., Budapest, Hungary). Quantification of image objects (e.g., nuclei or cytoplasm) and unbiased analysis of immunostaining results were performed using the semiautomated image analysis software Quan Center v.1.16.2. HIF‐1α, VEGF, iNOS, and ET‐1 expressions were scored by the Allred score system [11]. Staining scores were quantified as follows:
Proportion score: 0, no staining; 1, ≤1% positive staining of cytoplasm of cells; 2, 1–10% positive staining of cytoplasm of cells; 3, 11–33% positive staining of cytoplasm of cells; 4, 34–66% positive staining of cytoplasm of cells; and 5, ≥67% positive staining of cytoplasm of cells. Intensity score: 0, negative; 1, weak staining; 2, intermediate staining; and 3, strong staining. Total score (TS) = proportion score + intensity score; low score: TS < 5, high score: TS ≥ 5.
Microvessel density (MVD) was defined as the number of CD34‐positive staining vessels per field counted in the area of highest vascular density as described previously [12]. Individual stained microvessels were point counted at 400× magnification. Randomly selected three fields with the highest number of blood vessels were subjected to analysis, and the mean blood vessel density was calculated by dividing the average number of blood vessels by the area of the field (no. of blood vessels/1 mm2).
In this study, we used the Kruskal–Wallis test (a nonparametric method for comparing 2 or more independent samples of equal or different sample sizes, small sample sizes, or data are not symmetric) to analyze the differences in the concentrations of HIF‐1α, VEGF, iNOS, and ET‐1 between CHD patients and healthy persons. Statistical significance was considered when p < 0.05. All statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 19 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA).
Figure 1 shows the representative IHC staining of HIF‐1α, VEGF, iNOS, ET‐1, and CD34 of autopsy cases without CHD (Figures 1A, 1C, 1E, 1G, and 1I) in comparison with autopsy cases with CHD (Figures 1B, 1D, 1F, 1H, and 1J). Table 2 presents the scores of HIF‐1α, VEGF, iNOS, and ET‐1 analyzed by the semiautomated image analysis software and the mean MVD. Table 3 depicts the relationship of HIF‐1α, VEGF, iNOS, and ET‐1 expressions between CHD and non‐CHD autopsy cases determined by the Kruskal–Wallis test (nonparametric method). Overexpression of HIF‐1α (p < 0.001), iNOS (p = 0.002), and ET‐1 (p = 0.019) were significant in CHD autopsy cases compared with non‐CHD autopsy cases.
In our 19 CHD cases, high expression of HIF‐1α was found in all cases (100%). Statistical analysis using the Mantel–Cox method also indicated that high HIF‐1α expression had significant correlation with CHD patients' survival (p = 0.013).
A high percentage of VEGF expression was found in 17 of the 19 CHD cases (89.5%; 9 cases of ACHD, 3 cases of CCHD, 3 cases of CHD with chromosomal abnormalities, and 2 cases of complex CHD). Low expression of VEGF (TS < 5) was found in two (10.5%) of the 19 CHD cases [1 case PDA (Case No. 9) and 1 case of bilateral intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH; Case No. 10)]. There was no significant difference in VEGF expression between CHD and non‐CHD autopsy cases (Table 2).
High percentage of iNOS expression was found in 15 CHD cases [78.9%; 9 cases of ACHD, 3 cases of CCHD, 1 case of CHD with chromosomal abnormality (Trisomy 13), and 2 cases of complex CHD]. Low expression of iNOS was found in four CHD cases [21.1%; 1 case with PDA and ASD (Case No. 6), 1 case with congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH; Case No. 7), and 2 cases with chromosomal abnormality—trisomy 18 and trisomy 21 (Case Nos. 16 and 17)].
High percentage of ET‐1 expression was found in 16 CHD cases (84.2%). Low expression of ET‐1 was found in three CHD cases [1 case with PDA and ASD (Case No. 9), 1 case with PDA, VSD, and diaphragm defect (Case No. 11), and 1 case with chromosomal abnormality (Trisomy 21; Case No. 17)].
High percentage of MVD expression (MVD > 0.5 × 103/mm2 defined as high MVD) was found in 16 (84.2%) CHD cases. MVD had a significant correlation with VEGF expression (p = 0.04) in our study.
Previous studies have indicated that hypoxia is a common feature of CHD [[13], [14]]. HIF‐1α expression is induced by cellular response to hypoxia, and it appears to be a master transcription factor capable of inducing the expression of genes related to autoregulation, glucose metabolism, cell survival and proliferation, angiogenesis, energy metabolism, and erythropoiesis. In this study, HIF‐1α expression, as well as three downstream target genes, VEGF, iNOS, and ET‐1, were evaluated in autopsy samples of infants with CHD by IHC staining. Our results demonstrated that the high expression levels of HIF‐1α were significantly elevated in patients with CHD compared with non‐CHD cases, and the downstream genes of VEGF, iNOS, and ET‐1 were upregulated significantly in most CHD cases. We also performed the IHC staining in different sites (right ventricle, left atrium, and septum). The scores of different markers in these sites were similar to the site of the left ventricle (data not shown). Figure S1 shows the HIF‐1α, VEGF, iNOS, ET‐1, and CD34 IHC staining in the right ventricle (see Supplementary Figures S1A–S1E online), left atrium (see Supplementary Figures S1F–S1J online), and septum (see Supplementary Figures S1K–S1O online), respectively.
Previous experimental and clinical studies have indicated that HIF‐1α plays an important role in the pathogenesis of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN) and CCHD [[14], [15]]. HIF‐1α protein could also be detected in autopsy samples from patients with acute myocardial infarction [16]. In addition, HIF‐1α expression increased in cardiomyocytes of ischemic rat hearts [17], and chronic hypoxemia is associated with the induction and stabilization of HIF‐1α as well as its target genes VEGF and eNOS in infants with CCHD [18]. Constitutive overexpression of HIF‐1α in murine heart resulted in the attenuation of infract size and improved cardiac function, suggesting the involvement of HIF‐1α in myocardial remodeling [19]. Our IHC results also illustrated that high expression of HIF‐1α was found in all different groups of CHD autopsy cases. Thus, HIF‐1α is an important regulator in patients with CHD.
VEGF is a potent stimulator of angiogenesis, which induces widespread formation of collateral blood vessels as a compensatory mechanism to achieve the adequate oxygen supply to tissues in CCHD cases [20]. VEGF also promotes angiogenesis and neovascularization in the myocardium under hypoxic and ischemic conditions [21] and has been suggested to contribute to cardiac remodeling in response to mechanical stress [22]. Persistently higher VEGF level may be related to the development of systemic to pulmonary collateral arteries in patients with CCHD [23]. Abnormal blood vessel proliferation often occurs in patients with CHD and this may represent a form of anomalous angiogenesis, especially in the lungs or myocardium [24]. In our study, most CHD cases were observed to have high expression levels of VEGF. However, few cases were observed to have low expression levels of VEGF. Prior research indicated that IVH in premature infants might involve dysfunction of the tight junction of the blood–brain barrier [25], which disrupts the choroid plexus. IVH might injure the choroid plexus resulting in VEGF being unable to reach its receptors, eventually leading to reduced VEGF expression. The brain also contains multipotential stem cells that can differentiate into glial cells to produce VEGF. Disruption of brain tissue by IVH might also reduce VEGF production by these glial cells. This phenomenon could explain the low expression of VEGF in the case of CHD with brain lesion (Case No. 10). In addition, expression levels of VEGF did not show significant difference between CHD and non‐CHD cases. Previous research has indicated that VEGF is expressed in multiple embryonic and fetal tissues, with the highest levels found in the lung, kidney, and heart during development [26]. In addition, VEGF expression in normal infants is elevated during the neonatal period and decreases a few months after birth [23]. Therefore, this could explain why VEGF expression did not show a significant difference between the CHD and non‐CHD groups in our study.
A previous study has indicated that hypoxia increased both iNOS messenger RNA and protein levels but had no effect on neuronal NOS levels [27]. Significant increases in eNOS and iNOS expressions were found in pulmonary vascular endothelial cells of patients with CHD compared with control infants [28]. Hypoxia causes an increase in iNOS expression in cardiac myocytes and HIF‐1 is essential for the hypoxic regulation of iNOS gene expression [29]. In our study, a high percentage of iNOS expression was observed in CHD cases and this showed a significant difference with non‐CHD cases. This IHC staining result was similar to those obtained with other groups using different experimental methods. Other groups also found that iNOS expression was significantly higher in CCHD compared with ACHD [30], but our result did not reveal this phenomenon. This may be due to the fewer number of CCHD autopsy samples in this study; therefore, we could not obtain the same result compared with other groups. Low expression of iNOS was found in several cases in CHD (Case Nos. 6 and 7), suggesting that immaturity of the skeletal muscle and muscle dysfunction might alter the induction of iNOS expression [31]. Besides, low expression of iNOS was also found in Trisomy 18 (Case No. 16) and Trisomy 21 (Case No. 17), suggesting that chromosome abnormality (i.e., Trisomy 18 and Trisomy 21) would affect iNOS production through cardiac abnormality [32].
A previous study pointed out that ET‐1 receptor dysregulation is associated with structural alteration of pulmonary arteries in newborns with CDH and PPHN, suggesting that dysregulation of ET‐1 receptors may contribute to PPHN associated with CDH [33]. Another study indicated that that immunoreactive endothelin‐1 levels are often elevated in children with pulmonary hypertension, and they are strongly correlated with pulmonary vasoreactivity during acute hypoxia. Whether elevated immunoreactive endothelin‐1 levels contribute directly to or are markers of altered pulmonary vascular tone and reactivity in children with pulmonary hypertension remains speculative [34]. Specific features in Down syndrome could be associated with ET‐1 injury and might cause persistent increases in ET‐1 concentration and prolong artificial respiration [35]. Hypoxia is one of the most potent inducers of ET‐1 gene expression in endothelial cells and may be the primary cause of the increased production of ET‐1 during myocardial ischemia. Hypoxia induces the synthesis and secretion of ET‐1 in isolated endothelial cells by a mechanism that is antagonized by NO and carbon monoxide and mimicked by transition metals [[36], [37], [38]]. Another study also implies that a positive feedback loop may be formed between ET‐1 and HIF‐1α and this may continually promote smooth muscle cell contraction and proliferation and contribute to the development of pulmonary hypertension [39]. The recent development of ET receptor antagonists as potential therapeutic agents suggests that the investigation of ET receptor antagonists for the treatment of both chronic and acute pulmonary hypertension secondary to CHD is warranted [40]. In our studies, high expression of ET‐1 was found in most CHD cases and had significant difference compared with the non‐CHD cases by IHC staining. This result is similar to other groups using different experimental methods. Therefore, ET‐1 could be a pathophysiologic regulator in CHD patients.
A previous study indicated that CCHD resulting in chronic hypoxia might exclusively provoke angiogenesis in the subendocardial meshwork of the heart wall, and ventricular dysfunction observed in some cases of CCHD could not be predicted by the estimation of MVD [12]. Another study has indicated that hypoxia mediated the development of the myocardial microvessels and the expression of VEGF in the serum and the upregulation of VEGF in patients with CCHD may lead to the development of myocardial microvessels [24]. In our study, the MVD values calculated from CD34 staining were significantly larger in CHD cases compared with non‐CHD cases (p < 0.05) and CD34 expression had significant correlation with VEGF (p < 0.05). The mean MVD in CCHD is higher than ACHD in our study and similar to previous studies [[12], [24]]. However, whether MVD medicated by VEGF could be a predictive marker of ventricular dysfunction in patients with CHD should be further studied.
In conclusion, significantly high percentages of HIF‐1α, VEGF, iNOS, and ET‐1 expressions were observed in our CHD autopsy cases. HIF‐1α induced by hypoxia could play a potential role in relating downstream gene expressions in CHD patients. Upregulation of VEGF by HIF‐1α could play an important role in triggering angiogenesis to protect myocardial cell survival in a hypoxic microenvironment. Therefore, HIF‐1α could be a significant prognosis marker in CHD and be a prospective candidate in the development of target therapy in cardiovascular diseases.
This study is supported by a grant from the Kaohsiung Medical University Research Foundation (KMU‐M103028).