AbstractThe EFSA Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to Food (ANS) provides a scientific opinion re‐evaluating the safety of agar (E 406) as a food additive. In the European Union (EU), agar (E 406) has been evaluated by the Scientific Committee for Food (SCF) in 1989, who allocated to agar a not specified acceptable daily intake (ADI), and by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) in 1974, who considered very few data to conclude to a not limited ADI. According to the conceptual framework for the risk assessment of certain food additives re‐evaluated under Commission Regulation (EU) No 257/2010, the Panel considered that the safety assessment is limited to the use and use levels received from industry in 7 food categories for which data were considered in this opinion out of the 70 food categories in which agar (E 406) is authorised; an indicative high refined exposure assessment up to 26 mg/kg body weight (bw) per day has been calculated in toddlers at the 95th percentile (non‐brand‐loyal scenario); agar is unlikely to be absorbed unchanged and slightly fermented by intestinal microbiota; sufficient toxicity data were available; there was no concern with respect to the genotoxicity of agar; no carcinogenic effects were reported in carcinogenicity studies in mice and rats at the doses of 4,500 mg/kg bw per day and 2,500 mg/kg bw per day, respectively, the highest doses tested; oral intake of agar (4,500 mg/person corresponding to 64 mg/kg bw per day) was tolerated in humans for 12 weeks without noticeable side effects. Therefore, the Panel concluded that there is no need for a numerical ADI for agar and that there is no safety concern for the general population at the refined exposure assessment for the reported uses of agar as a food additive.

Following a request from the European Commission, the Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to Food (ANS) was asked to re‐evaluate the safety of agar (E 406) when used as a food additive.
The Panel was not provided with a newly submitted dossier and based its evaluation on previous evaluations and reviews, additional literature that has come available since then and the data available following a public call for data. The Panel noted that not all original studies on which previous evaluations were based were available for re‐evaluation by the Panel.
Agar (E 406) is authorised as a food additive in the European Union (EU) in accordance with Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 on food additives. Specific purity criteria on agar (E 406) have been defined in Commission Regulation (EU) No 231/2012. In the EU, agar (E 406) has been evaluated by the Scientific Committee for Food (SCF) in 1989 (SCF, 1989) and by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) in 1974 (JECFA, 1974). The SCF did not consider it necessary to specify an acceptable daily intake (ADI), and consequently, allocated to agar a not specified ADI. JECFA considered very few data (two animal studies, one human study) to conclude to a not limited ADI.
Agar is extracted from certain strains of marine algae of the families Gelidiaceae and Gracilariaceae and relevant red algae of the class Rhodophyceae (Commission Regulation (EU) No 231/2012). Agar (E 406) is defined as a hydrophilic colloidal polysaccharide consisting mainly of galactose units with a regular alternation of l‐ and d‐isomeric forms. These hexoses are alternately linked with alpha‐1,3 and beta‐1,4 bonds in the copolymer. On about every tenth d‐galactopyranose unit, one of the hydroxyl groups is esterified with sulfuric acid which is neutralised by calcium, magnesium, potassium or sodium.
Because of its polysaccharidic nature, agar can be a substrate of microbiological contamination during storage. The latter has been recently demonstrated by the mycotoxin contaminations of gums (Zhang et al., 2014). The Panel noted that the differences in the microbiological criteria for agar between the specifications given by the EU Regulation and those given by JECFA are not decisive.
Degradation of agar has been investigated in an in vitro human model. This study demonstrated that agar would be partially fermented during its passage through the large intestine by the action of the intestinal tract microflora. The rate of hydrolysis in the gastrointestinal tract in humans is unknown; however, the Panel considered that agar is unlikely to be absorbed unchanged, and that the limited extent of fermentation of agar would lead to products such as short‐chain fatty acids (SCFA). Based on the available knowledge on the role of SCFA as end products of the fermentation of dietary fibres by the anaerobic intestinal microflora (Topping and Clifton, 2001; Den Besten et al., 2013), the Panel considered that their potential formation as fermentation products from agar does not raise any concern.
The acute toxicity of agar in mice, rats and rabbits is low.
No adverse effects have been identified up to 10,000 mg/kg body weight (bw) per day in mice and 4,500 mg/kg bw per day in rat, the highest dose tested, in two dose range‐finding subchronic toxicity studies performed by the National Toxicology Program (NTP) in 1982 (Doc. provided to EFSA n.8).
No genotoxic activity was observed in the available in vitro and in vivo genotoxicity assays with agar. The Panel noted that the package of available studies was limited, but also that agar is routinely used as a substrate in in vitro gene mutation assays in bacteria and mammalian cells. Overall, considering its chemical structure and negligible absorption, the Panel concluded that there is no concern with respect to the genotoxicity of agar (E 406).
No chronic toxicity studies according to OECD guidelines have been identified by the Panel.
In carcinogenicity studies by NTP (Doc. provided to EFSA n.8, 1982; Melnick et al., 1983), no indication of a substance‐related increased tumour incidence was reported. The authors stated that under the experimental conditions used, agar was not carcinogenic to mice and rat at the highest doses tested (up to 4,500 or 2,500 mg/kg bw per day, respectively). The Panel agreed with the authors.
No data on reproductive toxicity were available. In the prenatal developmental toxicity studies in rats and hamsters, no maternal and developmental effects were observed up to the highest dose tested (1,140 and 650 mg agar/kg bw per day, respectively) (Doc. provided to EFSA n.3).
Agar is used as an adjuvant in the treatment of diabetes and/or obesity (Maeda et al., 2005). This study did not show noticeable side effects in participants receiving a daily dose of 4.5 g agar for 12 weeks agar as an adjuvant in the treatment of diabetes and/or obesity (Maeda et al., 2005). No adverse effects were described for agar as a mild laxative in single doses from 2.75 to 5.5 g or in daily doses from 4 to 16.5 g administered with sufficient fluids, but intestinal stenosis was given as a contraindication (Heber, 2007).
Agar (E 406) is authorised in a wide range of foods but reported by industry to be used in a limited number of food categories (9/70). According to the Panel, it is not expected that brand loyalty will result in higher exposure in the general population, except in specific populations consuming foods belonging to the food categories 13.2, 13.3 and 13.4. The Panel therefore selected the non‐brand‐loyal refined scenario as the most relevant exposure scenario for this additive.
In the maximum level and refined scenarios, only seven food categories (out of 70 in which agar is authorised in the Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008) for which data have been reported by industry, were included. The Panel considered that the uncertainties identified would result in an overestimation of exposure for these seven food categories.
Considering information from the Mintel Global New Products Database (GNPD), only approximately 50% of the food products labelled with agar (E 406) belonged to food subcategories for which reported use levels were available, and consequently used in the exposure assessment. The Panel noted that given the information from the Mintel GNPD it may be assumed that agar is used in food categories for which no data have been provided by food industry. If this is confirmed, the present assessment would therefore result in an underestimation of the exposure.
The Panel further noted that the exposure to agar from its use according the Annex III (Part 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 section A) to Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 was not considered in the exposure assessment.
The Panel also noted that the refined exposure estimates are based on information provided on the reported level of use of agar (E 406). If actual practice changes, this refined estimates may no longer be representative and should be updated.
According to the conceptual framework for the risk assessment of certain food additives re‐evaluated under Commission Regulation (EU) No 257/2010 (EFSA ANS Panel, 2014) and given that:
the safety assessment carried out by the Panel is limited to the use and use levels in seven food categories for which data were considered in this opinion out of the 70 food categories in which agar (E 406) is authorised;an indicative high refined exposure assessment up to 26 mg/kg bw per day has been calculated in toddlers at the 95th percentile (non‐brand‐loyal scenario);agar is unlikely to be absorbed unchanged and is slightly fermented by intestinal microbiota;sufficient toxicity data were available;there is no concern with respect to the genotoxicity of agar (E 406);no carcinogenic effects were reported in carcinogenicity studies in mice and rats at the doses of 4,500 mg/kg bw per day and 2,500 mg/kg bw per day, respectively, the highest doses tested;oral intake of agar (4,500 mg/person corresponding to 64 mg/kg bw per day) was tolerated in humans for 12 weeks without noticeable side effects,
the Panel concluded that there is no need for a numerical ADI for agar, and that there is no safety concern for the general population at the refined exposure assessment for the reported uses of agar as food additive.
The Panel recommended that the maximum limits for the impurities of toxic elements (lead, mercury, cadmium and arsenic) in the EC specification should be revised in order to ensure that agar (E 406) as a food additive will not be a significant source of exposure to those toxic elements in food, in particular for infants and children.
The Panel recommended that information on the possible use of formaldehyde should be provided since no such information was made available following the call for data.
Due to the discrepancies observed between the data reported from industry and the Mintel database, where agar is labelled in more products than in food categories for which data were reported from industry, the Panel recommended collection of data of usage and use levels of agar (E 406) in order to perform a more realistic exposure assessment.
The present opinion deals with the re‐evaluation of the safety of agar (E 406) when used as food additives. Agar (E 406) is an authorised food additive in the European Union (EU) according to Annex II and Annex III of Regulation (EC) No 1333/20081.
Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council on food additives requires that food additives are subject to a safety evaluation by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) before they are permitted for use in the EU. In addition, it is foreseen that food additives must be kept under continuous observation and must be re‐evaluated by EFSA.
For this purpose, a programme for the re‐evaluation of food additives that were already permitted in the EU before 20 January 2009 has been set up under the Regulation (EU) No 257/20102. This Regulation also foresees that food additives are re‐evaluated whenever necessary in the light of changing conditions of use and new scientific information. For efficiency and practical purposes, the re‐evaluation should, as far as possible, be conducted by group of food additives according to the main functional class to which they belong.
The order of priorities for the re‐evaluation of the currently approved food additives should be set on the basis of the following criteria: the time since the last evaluation of a food additive by the Scientific Committee on Food (SCF) or by EFSA, the availability of new scientific evidence, the extent of use of a food additive in food and the human exposure to the food additive taking also into account the outcome of the Report from the Commission on Dietary Food Additive Intake in the EU3 of 2001. The report ‘Food additives in Europe 2000’ submitted by the Nordic Council of Ministers to the Commission, provides additional information for the prioritisation of additives for re‐evaluation. As colours were among the first additives to be evaluated, these food additives should be re‐evaluated with a highest priority.
In 2003, the Commission already requested EFSA to start a systematic re‐evaluation of authorised food additives. However, as a result of adoption of Regulation (EU) 257/2010 the 2003 Terms of References are replaced by those below.
The Commission asks EFSA to re‐evaluate the safety of food additives already permitted in the Union before 2009 and to issue scientific opinions on these additives, taking especially into account the priorities, procedures and deadlines that are enshrined in the Regulation (EU) No 257/2010 of 25 March 2010 setting up a programme for the re‐evaluation of approved food additives in accordance with the Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council on food additives.
This re‐evaluation refers exclusively to the uses of agar (E 406) as a food additive in food, including food supplements, and does not include a safety assessment of other uses of agar as described in Section 3.4.2.
Agar (E 406) is authorised as a food additive in the EU in accordance with Annex II and Annex III to Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 on food additives. Specific purity criteria on agar (E 406) have been defined in Commission Regulation (EU) No 231/20124.
In the EU, agar (E 406) has been evaluated by the SCF in 1989 (SCF, 1989), who reviewed all the available studies on agar, including acute, subacute, developmental, carcinogenicity and mutagenicity studies. In view of the fact that agar is devoid of toxicity at the highest dose levels tested, the SCF did not consider it necessary to specify an acceptable daily intake (ADI), and consequently allocated to agar a not specified ADI.5
Agar (E 406) was evaluated by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) in 1974 (JECFA, 1974). JECFA considered very few data (two animal studies and one human study) to conclude to a not limited ADI. In 2006, JECFA updated the specifications of agar (JECFA, 2006).
Agar (E 406) has also been reviewed by the Nordic Council of Ministers (TemaNord, 2002), who concluded that there is no need for a re‐evaluation since the substance is widely used and there is a long history of safe intake of agar as a food.
Agar is one of the food additives that composed jelly mini‐cups which were suspended in 2004 by the European Commission to be placed on the market and import (Commission Decision 2004/37/EC; EC, 2004), following the measures taken and information provided by the different Member States. Jelly mini‐cups are defined as ‘jelly confectionery of a firm consistence, contained in semi rigid mini‐cups or mini‐capsules, intended to be ingested in a single bite by exerting pressure on the mini‐cups or mini‐capsule to project the confectionery into the mouth’.
In 2004, the EFSA Panel on Food Additives, Flavourings, Processing Aids and Materials in Contact with Food (EFSA AFC Panel, 2004) prepared a scientific opinion on a request from the European Commission related to the use of certain food additives derived from seaweed or non‐seaweed origin, including agar (E 406) in jelly mini‐cups. The AFC Panel concluded that any of these gel‐forming additives or of any other type that gave rise to a confectionery product of a similar size, with similar physical and/or physicochemical properties and that could be ingested in the same way as the jelly mini‐cups, would give rise to a risk for choking (EC, 2004). The use of these additives in jelly mini‐cups is not authorised in the EU.6
Agar is permitted as a binding and viscosity controlling agent in cosmetic products (European Commission database‐CosIng7). Agar is included in the EU Register8 of feed additives (Regulation (EC) No 1831/20039).
The Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to Food (ANS) was not provided with a newly submitted dossier. EFSA launched public calls for data,10 , 11 , 12 and, if relevant, contacted other scientific risk assessment bodies to collect relevant information from interested parties.
The Panel based its assessment on information submitted to EFSA following the public calls for data, information from previous evaluations and additional available literature up to the last Working Group meeting before the adoption of the opinion.13 Attempts were made at retrieving relevant original study reports on which previous evaluations or reviews were based; however, these were not always available to the Panel.
The EFSA Comprehensive European Food Consumption Database (Comprehensive Database14) was used to estimate the dietary exposure.
The Mintel's Global New Products Database (GNPD) is an online resource listing food products and compulsory ingredient information that should be included in labelling. This database was used to verify the use of agar (E 406) in food products.
This opinion was formulated following the principles described in the EFSA Guidance on transparency with regard to scientific aspects of risk assessment (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2009) and following the relevant existing guidance documents from the EFSA Scientific Committee.
The ANS Panel assessed the safety of agar (E 406) as a food additive in line with the principles laid down in Regulation (EU) 257/2010 and in the relevant guidance documents: Guidance on submission for food additive evaluations by the Scientific Committee on Food (SCF, 2001) and taking into consideration the Guidance for submission for food additive evaluations in 2012 (EFSA ANS Panel, 2012).
When the test substance was administered in the feed or in the drinking water, but doses were not explicitly reported by the authors as mg/kg body weight (bw) per day based on actual feed or water consumption, the daily intake was calculated by the Panel using the relevant default values as indicated in the EFSA Scientific Committee (2012) for studies in rodents or, in the case of other animal species, by JECFA (2000). In these cases, the daily intake is expressed as ‘equivalent to’. When in human studies in adults (aged above 18 years), the dose of the test substance administered was reported in mg/person per day, the dose in mg/kg bw per day was calculated by the Panel using a body weight of 70 kg as default for the adult population as described in the EFSA Scientific Committee Guidance document (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2012).
Dietary exposure to agar (E 406) from its use as a food additive was estimated combining food consumption data available within the EFSA Comprehensive European Food Consumption Database with the maximum levels according to Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1333/200815 and reported use levels submitted to EFSA following calls for data. Different scenarios were used to calculate exposure (see Section 3.3.1). Uncertainties on the exposure assessment were identified and discussed.
In the context of this re‐evaluation, the Panel followed the conceptual framework for the risk assessment of certain food additives re‐evaluated under Commission Regulation (EC) No 257/2010 (EFSA, 2014).
According to Commission Regulation (EU) No 231/2012, agar is ‘a hydrophilic colloidal polysaccharide consisting mainly of galactose units with a regular alternation of l‐ and d‐isomeric forms. These hexoses are alternately linked with alpha‐1,3 and beta‐1,4 bonds in the copolymer. On about every tenth d‐galactopyranose unit, one of the hydroxyl groups is esterified with sulfuric acid which is neutralised by calcium, magnesium, potassium or sodium. It is extracted from certain strains of marine algae of the families Gelidiaceae and Gracilariaceae and relevant red algae of the class Rhodophyceae.’
The Panel noted that not all families and species used in the production of agar are specified in the above definition. According to the reviews by Stanley (2006) and Armisen and Galatas (2000), agar can be extracted not only from species of the families Gracilariaceae, Gelidiaceae, but also from those of Phyllophoraceae and, Ceramiaceae and Ahnfeltiaceae families, all belonging to the red seaweeds (class Rhodophyta) algae. The majority of the raw material is harvested from wild growth (Stanley, 2006), although a commercial cultivation has been reported from Chile (OIiviera and Alveal, 1990).
The higher taxonomy of the red algae has long been disputed. Recent systematic systems were published by Saunders and Hammersand (2004), Adl et al. (2005) and Hwan Su Yoon Müller et al. (2006). Since these systems differ from each other and from previous systems in the higher taxa, in the present opinion we therefore only refer to genus and species of such algae.
Agar has the CAS Registry Number 9002‐18‐0, and the EINECS No 232‐658‐1.
Based on structural evaluations, agar is a linear polysaccharide built up of alternating 3‐linked β‐d‐galactopyranose and 4‐linked α‐l‐galactopyranose residues, a substantial part of the α‐l‐galactose residues may exist as a 3,6‐anhydro derivative (Knutsen et al., 1994; Stanley, 2006). Thus, the basic structure of agar consists of a repeating disaccharide unit which is termed ‘agarobiose’ (Stanley, 2006); the structural formula is presented in Figure 1.
Older investigations revealed that agar can be separated at least into two polysaccharides named ‘agarose’ and ‘agaropectin’ which are both agarobiose polymers (Araki, 1956). Agarose is a neutral gelling fraction and has a high molecular weight above 100,000 Da and a sulfate content usually below 0.15%, while agaropectin is a sulfated non‐gelling fraction with a molecular weight of only around 14,000 Da and a sulfate content of 5–8% (Armisen and Galatas, 2000). However, more recent investigations suggest that agar consists not only of two well defined polysaccharides – agarose and agaropectin – but also it is in fact a complex mixture of polysaccharides, ranging from virtually uncharged molecules to various charged galactans, some rich in sulfate, others in pyruvate (Duckworth and Yaphe, 1971; Stanley, 2006; Doc. provided to EFSA n. 2 and 5). Thereby, the structure of agar is highly dependent on the seaweed sources and the manufacturing method (Stanley, 2006).
According to Commission Regulation (EU) No 231/2012, agar is odourless or has a slight characteristic odour. Unground agar usually occurs in bundles consisting of thin, membranous, agglutinated strips, or in cut, flaked or granulated forms. It may be light yellowish orange, yellowish grey to pale yellow or colourless. It is tough when damp, brittle when dry. Powdered agar is white to yellowish white or pale yellow.
Agar is known under several synonyms such as agar‐agar, gelose, Japan agar, Bengal, Ceylon, Chinese or Japanese isinglass, Layor Carang (JECFA 2006, Commission Regulation (EU) No 231/2012).
Specifications of agar have been defined in Commission Regulation (EU) No 231/1012 and by JECFA (2006). The available specifications are listed in Table 1.
The Panel noted that there is also a ‘Foreign insoluble matter test’ in JECFA specifications that is not present in the Commission specifications.
For pharmaceutical use, specifications are given in 8.4th European Pharmacopeia (2015).
The Panel noted that in the EU specifications the most recent nomenclature could be used in relation to the class of Rhodophyceae.
Because of its polysaccharidic nature, agar can be a substrate of microbiological contamination during storage. The latter has been recently demonstrated by the mycotoxin contaminations of gums (Zhang et al., 2014). The Panel noted that the differences in the microbiological criteria for agar between the specifications given by the EU Regulation and those given by JECFA are not decisive.
Information on the levels of toxic metals (e.g. lead, mercury, cadmium, and arsenic), as requested in the EFSA call for data12 was not provided by interested parties. The Panel noted that, according to the EU specifications for agar (E 406), impurities of the toxic elements arsenic, cadmium, lead and mercury are accepted up concentrations of 3, 1, 5 and 1 mg/kg, respectively. Contamination at those levels could have a significant impact on the exposure to these metals for which the intake is already close to the health‐based guidance values established by the EFSA (EFSA CONTAM Panel, 2009a,b, 2010, 2012).
No information on mean particle size and the particle size distribution was provided by interested parties.12
The industrial sources of agar used as a food additive are various species of red algae, the so‐called agarophytes. In general, these algae belong to one of the two genera Gelidium or Gracilaria, respectively.
The number of species reported to be used worldwide in the commercial production of agar is 32 (Stanley, 2006), of which 12 are stated to be of primary commercial value (Stanley, 2006). The latter are (species as followed by producer countries): Gelidium acerosa (Japan, India), Gelidium amansii (Japan), Gelidium cartilagineum (USA, Mexico, South Africa), Gelidium corneum (South Africa, Portugal, Spain, Morocco), Gelidium liatulum (Japan), Gelidium lingulatum (Chile), Gelidium pacificum (Japan), Gelidium pristoides (South Africa), Gelidium sesquidale (Portugal, Morocco) and Gracilaria confervoides (South Africa) (Stanley, 2006). Even though many species of Gelidium are mentioned, according to McHugh (2003), Gracilaria algae still are the major agar source worldwide.
Industrially, agar is produced by a variety of extraction methods developed over the centuries (Stanley, 2006). In general, the production from harvest of the algae to the final packed agar in powder form consists of the following steps: harvesting and transport to coastal site for the preliminary drying as followed by bleaching, transport to processing plant, agar extraction process consisting of alkaline treatment (in the case of Gracilaria spp.), washing, soaking for extraction, filtration, gelling, freezing/thawing, drying, milling and packing (FAO, 2014‐2015).
The preservation of the seaweeds, between the time of harvesting and their actual use by the agar manufacturer is important. The first step is preservation through dehydration, to avoid fermentation that first destroys the agar and then the seaweed. In general, the moisture content is reduced to about 20% by natural or artificial drying. This also reduces the risk of post‐harvest contamination and growth of fungi, and subsequent production of mycotoxins. In recent (current) industrial practice of agar production, sodium hypochlorite (Li et al., 2008) and/or H2O2 (Stanley, 2006) are described as being used for bleaching. Positive experiments with photobleaching using sunlight have been described (Li et al., 2008).
It is necessary to avoid wetting during transportation and/or storage. The stability of agar contained in Gelidium species is higher than that of Gracilaria agar. Gelidium agar thus can be preserved in seaweeds indefinitely, provided that they have been treated properly. However, agar contained in Gracilaria can be hydrolysed both due to endogenous enzymes and to the growth of Bacillus cereus. According to Freile‐Pelegrin (2000), some ways for preservation of Gracilaria algae during storage using formaldehyde have been reported. However, Freile‐Pelegrin stated that such treatment has disadvantages since formaldehyde is highly toxic and causes pollution, and therefore, it should not be used (Freile‐Pelegrin, 2000). No other references have been found on the use of formaldehyde in the production of agar. The Panel noted that no information on the use of formaldehyde following the call for data12 has been provided by the interested parties.
Extraction may be accomplished under acidic or basic conditions, depending on the type of agarophyte and the product quality (Stanley, 2006). Extraction from Gelidium is performed under pressure (105–110°C for 2–4 h). Gracilaria is usually treated with water at 95–100°C for 2–4 h. The remainder of the process is the same for both types of raw material. Acidic extraction improves the yield of agar, whereas basic treatment modifies the structure of the carbohydrate chain to enhance the gelling properties. For the extraction of Gracilaria spp., alkali treatment is mandatory. Agar from these species is in general of low quality due to high natural sulfation. However, by treatment with alkaline solutions, the quality is improved, among others by conversion of l‐galactose‐6‐sulfate to 3,6‐anhydro‐l‐galactose, which enhances the gel‐forming ability (Kumar and Fotedar, 2009). Also, a combination of basic treatment, which improves the gel strength, followed by acidic extraction may be used. For the alkali treatment, the seaweed is heated in 2–5% sodium hydroxide at 85–90°C for 1 h; the strength of the alkali varies with the species and is determined by testing on a small scale. After removal of the alkali, the seaweed is washed with water, and sometimes with very weak acid to neutralise any residual alkali. No matter the extraction process, the agar is recovered from the gelled extract by freezing and subsequent thawing which separates much of the water and dissolved salts (Stanley, 2006). The yield and the gel strength may depend not only on the extraction process but also on the time of the year the harvest took place (Marinho‐Soriano and Bourret, 2003, 2005). The latest developed method of extraction is the steam explosion technique where the agarophyte is heated in an autoclave to 140–190°C and then subjected to decompression. The exploded algae are then extracted with phosphate buffer (Stanley, 2006).
An analytical method for agar and further polysaccharides (locust bean gum, guar, gum arabic, tragacanth, arabinogalactan, carrageenan, furcellaran, xanthan) in dairy products was described by Glueck and Thier (1980). Thereby polysaccharides are extracted from foodstuff, and then fat, starch, milk proteins and carbohydrates are removed by extraction or degradation. The resulting polysaccharide fraction is analysed by gas chromatography after hydrolysis with trifluoroacetic acid, derivatisation of the resulting monosaccharides with hydroxylaminhydrochloride and acetic acid anhydride to form the aldonitrilacetate derivatives. The polysaccharides can be qualitatively identified by their characteristic monosaccharide pattern, and quantified via the single monosaccharide peaks. In the case of agar, the only hydrolysis product is galactose. For the polysaccharides, recoveries of 80–90% were obtained when adding 0.05% of the thickeners to skim milk or 1–2% to mixtures of ice cream or pudding constituents (Glueck and Thier, 1980). The analytical method without extraction from foodstuff was previously described by Mergenthaler and Scherz (1976). An alternative derivatisation method with trimethylchlorosilane is reported by Schmolck and Mergenthaler (1973).
In a later investigation, the analytical procedure described by Glueck and Thier (1980) was improved by Preuss and Thier (1983). Changes in the separation of interfering substances (fats, proteins and starch) allowed the quantitative determination of agar in a variety of foods like blancmange powder, glaze, fruit ice, and cream cheese. Recoveries for most of the thickeners and gums are about 60–85% with a coefficient of variation of 2–8%.
The Panel noted that both methods do not distinguish between agar and carrageenan as both consist only of galactose.
Mergenthaler and Scherz (1980) developed an analytical method which allows to distinct agar from carrageenan (and from other polysaccharides). After extraction of fat and proteins, the polysaccharides are eluted through a chromatographic column filled with diethylaminoethyl cellulose (DEAE)‐cellulose, where agar is separated from other polysaccharides inclusive carrageenan. The resulting fractions can be further analysed either by thin‐layer chromatography or, after derivatisation, by gas chromatography.
An electrophoretic method for qualitative and quantitative analysis of gelling agents in food (pudding, milk‐based baby food, sugar fruits, ice cream, ketchup, cream stabiliser) was published by Pechanek et al. (1982). After removal of fat, starch and proteins, the polysaccharides are precipitated and separated via electrophoresis using polyacrylamide gel, agarose gel or a cellulose acetate membrane. Polysaccharides are then quantified using a TL‐scanner.
Data on stability of food additive agar (E 406) during the shelf life were not available to the Panel. Agar quality and yield from the biomass of tropical agarophyte Gracilaria cornea after one and a half year of storage at a temperature of 22.1 ± 0.9°C and humidity of 59.8 ± 3.6% were within the range of food‐grade agar (Freile‐Pelegrin, 2000).
Agar in the dry state is not subject to contamination by microorganisms. However, agar solutions and gels are fertile media for bacteria and/or moulds and appropriate precautions should be taken to avoid the growth of microorganisms.16
Agar is a polysaccharide and therefore can suffer hydrolysis, which results in reduced molecular weight and lost of its gelling power. Acid hydrolysis appears as a result of lowered pH and becomes important if agar is extensively heated at pH below 5.5. Alkaline hydrolysis is important at pH above 8. The enzymatic hydrolysis is not relevant, as it is due to agarases (enzymes that break down agaroses) that are found in marine bacteria, in a few bacilli and schizosaccharomycetes that are not commonly found in food products where agar is used (Armisen and Galatas, 2000).
Due to the reactivity of agar with sugar, there is an increase in the gelling power of agar when used in products such as jams and jellies. The addition of humectants, such as glycerol or sorbitol, to agar gels reduces the drying of gels exposed to air. Tannic acid (pentadigalloyl glucose) present in some fruits like squash, apple and prune blocks the gelling process (Armisen and Galatas, 2000).
The high melting point of agar gels is also increased by the addition of salts (Saha and Bhattacharya, 2010). It has been conjectured that the enhancement of gel strength of agars by alkaline treatment may be in part due to removal of bound protein, thus producing a more regular polymer (Stanley, 2006).
In water or aqueous fluids, agar swells and may increase its volume by more than fivefold within 4 h (Teuscher et al., 2004; European Pharmacopeia, 2015), but, e.g. shows lower water binding capacity than guar gum or karaya gum. Agar is insoluble in cold water and in alcohol. However, agar is soluble in water at temperatures above the gel melting points (≥ 85°C). Then, it forms sols which can be cooled to much lower temperatures before setting to gels. Once the gel has set, reheating to higher temperature is required to melt it. This is known as ‘gelation hysteresis’ phenomenon. Viscosity of the sol is markedly dependent on the seaweed species from which the agar is extracted and on the extraction conditions employed (Stanley, 2006). Agar forms gels at very low concentrations, with a concentration threshold for gelation around 0.2% (Imeson, 2010).
According to Armisen and Galatas (2000), agar gelation occurs only in the neutral agarose fraction and does not need any other substance to gel. Agarose produces ‘physical gels’ which have all their structure formed only by the polymer molecules united solely by hydrogen bonds. Due to this unique gelling property, these gels hold in the interior network a great amount of water. The most remarkable property of ‘physical gels’ is their reversibility. They melt just by heating, but gel again upon cooling. The gelling temperature is around 38°C and the melting temperatures around 85°C.
In food some blended products of agar with other gelling agents are used to increase its gel strength, by modifying its texture or elasticity, or with antagonist to reduce the gel strength or block the gelling process. The use of a mixture of agar and locust bean gum reduces the loss of liquid from the gel (syneresis) during handling, transportation and storage (Armisen and Galatas, 2000). When mixed with konjac flour or glucomannan (which cannot form a gel alone), agar interacted synergistically to produce a more elastic gel (Aksowan, 2002).
Maximum levels of agar (E 406) have been defined in Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1333/200815 on food additives, as amended. In this document, these levels are named maximum permitted levels (MPLs).
Currently, agar (E 406) is an authorised food additive in the EU at quantum satis (QS) in almost all foods apart from jam, jellies and marmalades and other fruit and vegetable spreads. Agar (E 406) is included in the Group I of food additives authorised at QS.
Table 2 summarises foods that are permitted to contain agar (E 406) and the corresponding MPLs as set by Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008.
According to Annex III, Part 1 of Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008, agar (E 406) is authorised as a carrier in food additive at QS in all food additives.
According to Annex III, Part 2, to Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008, agar (E 406) is also authorised as food additive other than carriers in all foods additives at QS.
In addition, according to Annex III, Part 3 of Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008, agar (E 406) is also authorised as a food additive in food enzymes with a maximum level in the products (beverages or not) at QS.
According to Annex III, Part 4, to Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008, agar (E 406) is also authorised as food additive including carriers in all foods flavourings at QS.
Finally, according to Annex III, Part 5, Section A of Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008, agar (E 406) is also authorised at QS in all nutrients.
Most food additives in the EU are authorised at a specific MPL. However, a food additive may be used at a lower level than the MPL. Therefore, information on actual use levels is required for performing a more realistic exposure assessment, especially for those food additives for which no MPL is set and which are authorised according to QS.
In the framework of Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 on food additives and of Commission Regulation (EU) No 257/2010 regarding the re‐evaluation of approved food additives, EFSA issued public calls17 , 18 for occurrence data (usage level and/or concentration data) on agar (E 406). In response to this public call, updated information on the actual use levels of agar (E 406) in foods was made available to EFSA by industry. No analytical data on the concentration of agar (E 406) in foods were made available by the Member States.
Industry provided EFSA with data on use levels (n = 21) of agar (E 406) in foods for 9 out of the 70 food categories in which agar (E 406) is authorised.
Updated information on the actual use levels of agar (E 406) in foods was made available to EFSA by FoodDrinkEurope (FDE) (Doc. provided to EFSA n. 12), the International Chewing Gum Association (ICGA) (Doc. provided to EFSA n. 13), Babbi confectionery industry (Doc. provided to EFSA n. 10), Biovegan GmbH (Doc. provided to EFSA n. 11) and Interested party 1 (Doc. Provided to EFSA n. 14).
The Panel noted that Biovegan GmbH provided data on levels of agar used in glazing, or in the gelling agent to be inserted then in jam, marmalades and confectionery. These levels were reported as food category 18. The Panel decided not to use the data from Biovegan GmbH (Doc. provided to EFSA n. 11).
Appendix A provides data on the use levels of agar (E 406) in foods as reported by industry.
The Mintel's Global New Products Database (GNPD) is an online database which monitors product introductions in consumer packaged goods markets worldwide. It contains information of over 2 million food and beverage products of which more than 800,000 are or have been available on the European food market. Mintel started covering EU's food markets in 1996, currently having 20 out of its 28 member countries and Norway presented in the Mintel GNPD.19
For the purpose of this Scientific Opinion, the Mintel GNPD20 was used for checking the labelling of products containing agar (E 406) within the EU's food products as the Mintel GNPD shows the compulsory ingredient information presented in the labelling of products.
According to Mintel, agar (E 406) is labelled on more than 2,300 products of sauces, desserts, chewing gum and in decorations, coatings and fillings of foodstuff. Around 1,500 products were found to be published in this database between 2011 and 201615 out of which few drinks (n = 8): soy‐based drinks, flavoured milk and ready‐to‐drink coffee were also published. The main foods labelled with agar are chilled desserts, chocolate coating confectionery and cakes.
The Panel noted that information from the Mintel GNPD (Appendix B) indicated that approximately 15 out of the 72 food subcategories, categorised according to the Mintel nomenclature, in which agar (E 406) was labelled, were included by the Panel in the current exposure estimates. These 15 food subcategories represented approximately 50% of the food products items labelled with agar (E 406) in the database. Agar (E 406) is authorised in 50 out of the remaining 57 food subcategories not included in the exposure assessment.
Appendix B presents the percentage of the food products labelled with agar (E 406) between 2011 and 2016, out of the total number of food products per food subcategories according to the Mintel food classification.
Since 2010, the EFSA Comprehensive European Food Consumption Database (Comprehensive Database) has been populated with national data on food consumption at a detailed level. Competent authorities in the European countries provide EFSA with data on the level of food consumption by the individual consumer from the most recent national dietary survey in their country (cf. Guidance of EFSA on the ‘Use of the EFSA Comprehensive European Food Consumption Database in Exposure Assessment’ (EFSA, 2011a)). New consumption surveys recently21 added in the Comprehensive database were also taken into account in this assessment.22
The food consumption data gathered by EFSA were collected by different methodologies and thus direct country‐to‐country comparisons should be interpreted with caution. Depending on the food category and the level of detail used for exposure calculations, uncertainties could be introduced owing to possible subjects’ underreporting and/or misreporting of the consumption amounts. Nevertheless, the EFSA Comprehensive Database represents the best available source of food consumption data across Europe at present.
Food consumption data from the following population groups: infants, toddlers, children, adolescents, adults and the elderly were used for the exposure assessment. For the present assessment, food consumption data were available from 33 different dietary surveys carried out in 19 European countries (Table 3).
Consumption records were codified according to the FoodEx classification system (EFSA, 2011b). The nomenclature from the FoodEx classification system has been linked to the food categorisation system (FCS) as presented in Annex II of Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008, part D, to perform exposure estimates. In practice, FoodEx food codes were matched to the FCS food categories.
The food categories in which the use of agar (E 406) is authorised were selected from the nomenclature of the EFSA Comprehensive Database (FoodEx classification system), at the most detailed level possible (up to FoodEx Level 4) (EFSA, 2011b).
Some food categories or their restrictions/exceptions are not referenced in the EFSA Comprehensive Database and could therefore not be taken into account in the present estimate. This was the case for nine food categories (Appendix C) and may have resulted in an underestimation of the exposure. The food categories which were not taken into account are described below (in the ascending order of the FCS codes):
01.6.3 Other creams02.3 Vegetable oil pan spray05.4 Decorations, coatings and fillings, except fruit‐based fillings covered by category 04.2.4 restricted to fillings, toppings and coatings for fine bakery wares and desserts06.6 Batters06.7 Precooked or processed cereals08.3.3 Casings and coatings and decorations for meat14.1.3 Fruit nectars as defined by Directive 2001/112/EC and vegetable nectars and similar products, only vegetable nectars14.2.4 Fruit wine and made wine14.2.5 Mead.
For the following food category, the restrictions/exceptions which apply to the use of agar (E 406) could not be taken into account, and therefore the whole food category was considered for the exposure estimations. This applies to two food categories (Appendix C) and may have resulted in an overestimation of the exposure:
05.1 Cocoa and Chocolate products as covered by Directive 2000/36/EC, only energy‐reduced or with no added sugar08.3.2 Heat‐treated meat products, except foie gras, foie gras entier, blocs de foie gras, Libamáj, libamáj egészben, libamáj tömbben.
Most of the food categories were not taken into account because no concentration data were provided to EFSA. For the remaining food categories, the refinements considering the restrictions/exceptions as set in Annex II to Regulation No 1333/2008 were applied. Overall, for all scenarios, seven food categories were included in the present exposure assessment to agar (E 406) (Appendix C).
The Panel estimated chronic exposure to agar (E 406) for the following population groups: infants; toddlers, children, adolescents, adults and the elderly. Dietary exposure to agar (E 406) was calculated by multiplying agar (E 406) concentrations for each food category (Appendix C) with their respective consumption amount per kilogram of body weight for each individual in the Comprehensive Database. The exposure per food category was subsequently added to derive an individual total exposure per day. These exposure estimates were averaged over the number of survey days, resulting in an individual average exposure per day for the survey period. Dietary surveys with only 1 day per subject were excluded as they are considered as not adequate to assess repeated exposure.
This was carried out for all individuals per survey and per population group, resulting in distributions of individual exposure per survey and population group (Table 3). On the basis of these distributions, the mean and the 95th percentile of exposure were calculated per survey and per population group. The 95th percentile of exposure was only calculated for those population groups where the sample size was sufficiently large to allow this calculation (EFSA, 2011a). Therefore, in the present assessment, the 95th percentile of exposure for infants from Italy, and for toddlers from Belgium, Italy and Spain were not included.
The exposure assessment to agar (E 406) was carried out by the ANS Panel based on (1) maximum levels of data provided to EFSA (defined as the maximum level exposure assessment scenario) and (2) reported use levels (defined as the refined exposure assessment scenario) as provided by industry. These two scenarios are discussed in detail below.
A possible additional exposure from the use of agar (E 406) as a food additive in food additives, enzymes and nutrients in accordance with Annex III (Parts 1, 3 and 5) to Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 was not considered in any of the exposure assessment scenarios, as no data were available.
No specific scenario for food supplements was considered by the Panel because it is authorised at QS in the Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008, and no usage data were provided by industries.
The regulatory maximum level exposure assessment scenario is based on the MPLs as set in Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008. As agar (E 406) is authorised according to QS in almost all food categories, a ‘maximum level exposure assessment’ scenario was estimated based on the maximum reported use levels provided by industry, as described in the EFSA Conceptual framework (EFSA ANS Panel, 2014).
The concentration data used in this scenario are listed in Appendix C.
The Panel considers the exposure estimates derived following this scenario as the most conservative as it is assumed that the population groups will be exposed to agar (E 406) present in food at the maximum reported use levels over a long period of time.
The refined exposure assessment scenario is based on use levels reported by industry. This exposure scenario can consider only food categories for which the above data were available to the Panel.
Appendix C summarises the concentration levels of agar (E 406) used in the refined exposure assessment scenario. Based on the available data set, the Panel calculated two refined exposure estimates based on different model populations:
The brand‐loyal consumer scenario: It was assumed that a consumer is exposed long term to agar (E 406) present at the maximum reported use for one food category. This exposure estimate is calculated as follows: –Combining food consumption with the maximum of the reported use levels for the main contributing food category at the individual level;–Using the mean of the typical reported use levels for the remaining food categories.The non‐brand‐loyal consumer scenario: It was assumed that a consumer is exposed long term to agar (E 406) present at the mean reported use in food. This exposure estimate is calculated using the mean of the typical reported use levels for all food categories.
Table 4 summarises the estimated exposure to agar (E 406) from its use as a food additive in six population groups (Table 3) according to the different exposure scenarios. Detailed results per population group and survey are presented in Appendix D.
From the maximum level exposure assessment scenario, the mean exposure to agar (E 406) from its use as a food additive ranged from 0.01 mg/kg bw per day in infants to 17.0 mg/kg bw per day in toddlers. The 95th percentile of exposure to agar (E 406) ranged from < 0.01 mg/kg bw per day in infants to 48.7 mg/kg bw per day in toddlers.
From the refined estimated exposure brand‐loyal scenario, the mean exposure to agar (E 406) from its use as a food additive ranged from 0.01 mg/kg bw per day in infants to 14.8 mg/kg bw per day in toddlers. The high exposure to agar (E 406) ranged from < 0.01 mg/kg bw per day in infants to 44.5 mg/kg bw per day in toddlers. In the non‐brand‐loyal scenario, the mean exposure to agar (E 406) from its use as a food additive ranged from 0.01 mg/kg bw per day in infants to 8.4 mg/kg bw per day in toddlers. The 95th percentile of exposure to agar (E 406) ranged from < 0.01 mg/kg bw per day in infants to 26.2 mg/kg bw per day in toddlers.
Uncertainties in the exposure assessment of agar (E 406) have been discussed above. In accordance with the guidance provided in the EFSA opinion related to uncertainties in dietary exposure assessment (EFSA, 2007), the following sources of uncertainties have been considered and summarised in Table 8.
Agar (E 406) is authorised as a Group I food additive in 66 food categories and has a specific authorised uses in four categories (Table 2). Since, the majority of food categories correspond to the general Group I food additives authorisation, agar (E 406) may not necessarily be used in some of these food categories. This may explain why reported use levels of agar (E 406) were only available for nine food categories. The Panel calculated that the seven food categories taken into account in the present estimates constitutes between 12% and 16%, depending of the population groups, by weight of the food which according to Annex II may contain agar as a food additive.
Furthermore, the Panel noted that information from the Mintel's GNPD (Appendix B) indicated that approximately 15 out of the 72 food subcategories, categorised according to the Mintel nomenclature, in which agar (E 406) was labelled, were included by the Panel in the current exposure estimates. These 15 food subcategories represented approximately 50% of the food products items labelled with agar (E 406) in the database. In the remaining 57 food subcategories, in which agar (E 406) was labelled but which were not included in the exposure assessment, agar (E 406) was authorised in 50 food subcategories.
Overall, the Panel considered that the uncertainties identified result in an overestimation of the exposure to agar (E 406) as a food additive in the European countries for the maximum level exposure scenario and for the refined scenario considering only food categories for which data have been reported (10% of the authorised uses).
However, considering information from the Mintel GNPD, only approximately 50% of the food products labelled with agar (E 406) belonged to food subcategories for which reported use levels were available, and consequently used in the exposure assessment. The Panel noted that given the information from the Mintel's GNPD, it may be assumed that agar is used in food categories for which no data have been provided by food industry. If this was confirmed, it would therefore result in an underestimation of the exposure.
The Panel noted that food categories which may contain agar (E 406) due to carry‐over (Annex III, Parts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 section A) were not considered in the current exposure assessment.
Exposures to agar due to the following uses were not considered in this opinion.
Agar as an ingredient in slimming products and other foods
Uses of agar in slimming products and in products for supportive treatment of diabetes and/or obesity are described (Teuscher et al., 2004; Maeda et al., 2005; Haensel and Sticher, 2007; Imeson, 2010).
In these products, agar is regarded as a satiating material as it swells in the stomach to increase bulk and to give a feeling of fullness, leading to less intake of food. Agar, also known as kanten, is popular for dieting in the form of the ‘kanten plan’ or ‘kanten diet’ in Japan, which are also receiving publicity in the USA (Maeda et al., 2005; Imeson, 2010) (see Section 3.5.7).
The Panel noted that agar can also be used as an ingredient in the preparation of homemade foods.
Pharmaceutical uses
Agar is an excipient used in pharmaceutical products, e.g. as a tablet disintegrant or as an emulsifier. It is used in solid, semisolid and liquid dosage forms.
Several (older) textbooks and Pharmacopoeias mention the medicinal use of agar (British Pharmaceutical Codex (BPC), 1954; The United State Pharmacopeia (U.S.P) XVI, 1960; Teuscher, 1987). The daily dosage is given with 4–16 g, the average single dose is defined with 4 g (BPC, 1954; Sollmann, 1957; U.S.P. XVI, 1960; cited in JECFA, 1974). But also daily dosages up to 20 g are mentioned (List and Lörhammer, 1969). The action of agar is described as a mild laxative, due to its swelling properties. The intake of agar is thought to cause an increase in the bulk of the content of the intestine which stimulates the intestinal muscles, thereby aiding peristalsis. No adverse effects are described and the posology is given with three times daily 1–2 teaspoons (a teaspoon of 5 mL corresponds to 2.75 g agar) together with liquids (Heber, 2007). Agar is also used in combination products to treat constipation (e.g. with liquid paraffin and phenolphthalein); however, because of the often small amounts of agar in this combinations, it is only be judged as an emulsion stabiliser (Martindale, 2014).
From data provided by the European Medicines Agency (EMA), information was retrieved about the current medicinal use of agar and its use as an excipient in medicinal products (Doc. provided to EFSA n.1). For agar as an active ingredient, only few authorised medicinal products exist (or existed) within the EU (as combination with other active ingredients). In those combination products,23 the daily dosage of agar is claimed to be up to 900 mg (up to three times daily 300 mg) as an adjuvant in treatment of obesity. The usage in children is not foreseen.
There is substantial evidence that high molecular weight dietary polysaccharides, could be broken down in the large intestine in man. In addition to intermediate metabolites such as lactate, acrylate or fumarate, the main end products of this colonic anaerobic digestive process are short‐chain fatty acids (SCFA), such as acetic, propionic and butyric acids, which are absorbed from the colon (Cummings and Englyst, 1987). Only limited in vitro data on microbial fermentation of agar polysaccharides were available.
In vitro data
In an in vitro study, low molecular weight polysaccharides derived from agar were fermented using human faeces from three adult donors as the source of inoculum (Ramnani et al., 2012). These polysaccharides were prepared by use of either acid hydrolysis or degradation using hydrogen peroxide. During fermentation assays, organic matter disappearance and SCFA production were measured after 5, 10 or 24 h of anaerobic incubation. After 24 h of incubation, acetate and propionate productions were 3.4 times lower in case of Gelidium‐derived agar powder (14.4 mM) than for agar powder derived from Gracilaria (48.7 mM). The Panel noted that agar powders were less fermented than inulin (61.5 mM) and more fermented than cellulose (2.0 mM).
In vivo data
Digestibility of agar was investigated in an in vivo study (five albino rats, no further information about the strain) dosed with basal diet supplemented with agar (750 mg agar/rat per day) over 7 days; a digestibility of 21% was calculated (Booth et al., 1963). These authors defined the digestibility as the ratio of the total intake of the test material minus increase in faecal weight to the total intake of test material. The Panel noted that these data on digestibility, as defined by the authors, are not relevant for assessing the absorption process of agar.
Overall, the in vitro degradation of agar has been investigated in an in vitro human model. This study indicated that agar could be partially fermented during its passage through the large intestine by the action of the intestinal tract microflora. The rate of hydrolysis in the gastrointestinal tract in humans is unknown; however, the Panel considered that agar is unlikely to be absorbed unchanged and that the limited extent of fermentation of agar would lead to products such as SCFA. Based on the available knowledge on the role of SCFA as end products of the fermentation of dietary fibres by the anaerobic intestinal microflora (Topping and Clifton, 2001; Den Besten et al., 2013), the Panel considered that their potential formation as fermentation products from agar does not raise any concern.
Oral acute lethal dose (LD50) values for agar have been reported of 11,400 and 15,700 mg/kg bw in rats and mice, respectively (Bailey and Morgareidge, 1976, cited in NTP, 1982, Doc. provided to EFSA n.8).
An acute oral toxicity study was conducted with F344 rats and B6C3F1 mice. Groups of five males and five females of each species were administered a single dose of agar (630, 1,750, or 2,500 mg/kg bw) in distilled water by gavage. No chemical‐related effects were observed at necropsy for either rats or mice (Doc. provided to EFSA n.8).
Groups of 30 female F344 rats were dosed over 1 week with diet containing 3% agar (equivalent to 3,600 mg/kg bw per day) in freeze‐dried or gel form. There was no post‐observation period. The dosing caused no signs of illness and there were no significant differences with respect to final body weights and feed conversion (weight gain per gram dry feed consumed). No further parameters were tested (Morrissey and Norred, 1984).
In a 14‐day oral study, groups of five F344 rats and five B6C3F1 mice of either sex were dosed via the diet with 6,300, 12,500, 25,000, 50,000 or 100,000 mg/kg diet (in rats equivalent to 756, 1,500, 3,000, 6,000 or 12,000 mg/kg bw per day; and in mice equivalent to 1,260, 2,500, 5,000, 10,000 or 20,000 mg/kg bw per day). No differences in weight and mortality were observed. At necropsy on day 15, no substance‐related effects were noted. No further study details were provided (Doc. provided to EFSA n.8).
JECFA described a short‐term toxicity study not available as following:‘Six weanling male rats fed a diet containing 25% of agar for four weeks showed growth retardation during the third week. The dry weight of the cleaned stomach and caecum was found moderately increased. Colon and rectum were more than twice as heavy as in the controls (Fischer, 1957)’.
Glauert et al. (1983) performed a 6‐week feeding study in Sprague–Dawley rats. Ten male animals were randomly assigned to a group receiving a control diet, or an agar diet consisting of the control diet plus 8% added agar (equivalent to 9,600 mg/kg bw per day). The dosing caused no significant differences concerning diet intake (956 or 993 g for control diet or diet with 8% agar, respectively) and weight gain (116 or 119 g for control diet or diet with 8% agar, respectively). While in rats fed the control diet, the colon mucosa was flat with circular or slit‐like crypt openings occurring regularly, surface irregularities (deep, coarse folds appearing as discontinuities in the epithelial lining observed with an electron microscope scanning) developed in rats fed agar. The authors discussed that the disruptions in the colon surface might allow an increased absorption of toxins into the epithelial cells and also may cause an increase in cell proliferation in the crypts to replace damaged cells on the colon surface. The Panel noted that the high concentrations at which agar was administered in the diet may have led to damage of the lining epithelium of the colon. The Panel further noted that the observed effects appeared only 6 weeks after treatment and that other rat strains exposed to agar for longer periods and at higher concentrations in subchronic toxicity studies did not show similar effects.
In a study performed by Booth et al. (1963), one group of six weanling male rats was dosed with 15% of agar (equivalent to 1,350 mg/kg bw per day) via diet over 62 days.
The weight gain of the dosed animals was comparable to the controls (190 ± 11.9 g vs 199 ± 10.4 g in controls), but the food efficiency (weight gain/food intake) was significantly lower (−18%). Other parameters were not investigated. The Panel noted that the high concentrations in which agar has been administered in the diet may have caused nutritional imbalance.
JECFA described in 1974 a subchronic toxicity study not available to the Panel as follows:‘Four groups of six rats received diets containing 5%, 10%, 20% and 30% of agar, respectively, for 10 weeks. The group receiving the 10% diet gained weight about 20% faster than the controls; the other groups gained weight at the same rate as the controls. The rats fed diets containing 20% and 30% of agar required significantly more feed and water per gram of weight gain than the control group (Nilson and Schaller, 1941)’.
In a 13‐week oral dose range‐finding study, groups of 10 animals per sex (F344 rats and 10 B6C3F1 mice) were dosed via the diet with 0, 3,100, 6,300, 12,500, 25,000 or 50,000 mg/kg of diet (equivalent to 0, 279, 567, 1,125, 2,250 or 4,500 mg/kg bw per day in rat and 0, 629, 1,260, 2,500, 5,000 or 10,000 mg/kg bw per day in mice). Animals were observed twice daily, weighed weekly, and at study termination on day 91, all survivors were killed and necropsied. There were two deaths, one male control rat and one male control mouse. The dosing caused no changes in body weights and there were no substance‐related gross or histopathology effects. No further information was provided (abstract in NTP (1982), Doc. provided to EFSA n.8). The Panel noted that the NTP studies did not include haematology, urinalysis and clinical chemistry.
In the study by Litton Bionetics (Doc. provided to EFSA n.6), agar was assessed for its mutagenicity in the reverse mutation assay using Salmonella Typhimurium strains TA 1530 and G‐46 and for induction of mitotic gene conversion in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain D3) and no genotoxicity was observed. However, the Panel noted that the results from the bacteria gene mutation assay are limited due to the inadequate number of S. Typhimurium tester strains used and missing information on the use of metabolic activation and concentrations of test substance employed. In addition, the Panel noted that the gene conversion assay with S. cerevisiae has not been validated and it is no longer employed for risk assessment.
Agar was also assessed for its capability to induce chromosomal aberrations in anaphase in human embryonic lung cells (WI‐38) at dose levels of 10, 100 and 1,000 μg/mL without S9 mix. No cytogenetic effects were reported by authors (Doc. provided to EFSA n.6). However, the Panel noted that this assay, though scientifically sound, did not receive further validation.
In a host‐mediated assay, groups of five male IBR mice were administered agar by oral gavage at 7.15, 71.5 and 715.0 mg/kg either once (acutely) or on five consecutive days 24 h apart. Negative and positive control animal groups were also included. The highest dose level of agar (715 mg/kg) corresponded to the calculated LD5. The indicator organisms used in this study were: (i) two histidine auxotrophs (his G‐46, TA 1530) of S. Typhimurium for induction of reverse mutation and (ii) a diploid strain (D‐3) of S. cerevisiae for the induction of mitotic gene conversion. Both for the acute and subacute studies, within 30 min from the last administration, all animals received 2 mL of the indicator organism, intraperitoneally, each mL containing 3.0 × 108 cells for Salmonella and 5.0 × 108 cells for Saccharomyces. Three hours after the injection of the indicator organism, the mice were sacrificed and the host cells were aseptically washed out of the peritoneum of each animal and plated under standard conditions. A second experiment was additionally performed under the same experimental conditions with only one dose level of agar but at 5,000 mg/kg. Results obtained in both experiments indicated that agar did not show genotoxic activity in any of the indicator organisms and dose levels employed (Doc. provided to EFSA n.6). However, the Panel noted that the host‐mediated assay has not received further validation and it is no longer employed for risk assessment.
In an in vivo cytogenetic assay, the induction by agar of chromosomal aberrations in bone marrow cells of rats was investigated. Groups of five male albino rats were administered with test substance by oral gavage acutely at 7.15, 71.5 and 715 mg/kg bw or subacutely on five consecutive days, 24 h apart, at the same dose levels employed for the acute treatment. Negative and positive control animal groups were also included. For the acute treatment, sampling of bone marrow cells was performed at 6, 24 and 48 h from the last administration, while in the subacute study sampling was only performed at 6 h from the last administration. A second experiment was additionally performed under the same experimental conditions with only one dose level of agar but at 5,000 mg/kg. Results obtained indicated that agar induced no increases in the incidence of chromosomal aberrations in the bone marrow cells following both acute and subacute administration, at any of dose level employed. The Panel noted that this study, essentially complies with the OECD Guideline 475 requirements, although it was performed much earlier in the 1974 (Doc. provided to EFSA n.6).
In a dominant lethal assay, agar was administered by oral gavage to groups of 10 male albino rats acutely at 7.15, 71.5 and 715 mg/kg bw or subacutely on five consecutive days, 24 h apart, at the same dose levels employed for the acute treatment. Negative and positive control animal groups were also included. Following treatment, the males were sequentially mated with two females per week for 8 weeks (7 weeks in the subacute study) and housed separately until sacrifice. A second experiment was additionally performed under the same experimental conditions with only one dose level of agar but at 5,000 mg/kg. Total implants (live fetuses plus early and late fetal deaths), total dead (early and late fetal deaths), dead implants per total implants and preimplantation loss (calculated as the difference between the total corpora lutea and total implant counts) were evaluated. Results obtained indicated that agar induced some increases compared to the negative control in average implantations and average resorptions in the low dose group at week 8 in the acute treatment and some differences at various weeks throughout the parameters in the subacute treatment. However, these effects revealed no dose–response or time‐trend pattern. No effects were observed at 5,000 mg/kg both for the acute and subacute treatment. The author concluded that agar does not induce dominant lethal mutations under the reported experimental condition (Doc. provided to EFSA n.6). The Panel agreed with this conclusion and further noted that the number of animals employed for this study was low.
Overall, the Panel noted that, although the available in vitro and in vivo studies are limited, no genotoxic activity has been observed for agar. Moreover, agar is routinely used as a substrate in in vitro gene mutation assays in bacteria and mammalian cells. In addition, considering the chemical structure of agar and its negligible absorption, the Panel considered that there is no concern with respect to the genotoxicity of agar (E 406).
No chronic toxicity studies according to OECD guidelines or equivalent have been identified by the Panel.
Mice
A carcinogenicity study performed by NTP in 1982 (Doc. provided to EFSA n.8) and published by Melnick et al., 1983 was performed in groups of 50 B6C3F1 mice of either sex exposed to agar via diet (mixed to the feed, no solvent) at concentrations of 0, 25,000 or 50,000 mg agar/kg diet (equivalent to 0, 2,250 or 4,500 mg agar/kg bw per day in mice) for 103 weeks followed by 2 weeks on basal diet before study termination (Doc. provided to EFSA n.8, Melnick et al., 1983). Animals were observed twice daily, individual weights and clinical signs of toxicity were recorded monthly. Moribund animals and those that survived to the end of the study were killed. Gross and microscopic examinations were performed on all major organs and tissues, while parameters such as haematology, clinical chemistry and urinalysis were not investigated. In female mice, reduced mean bodyweights (−20% and −16% for low‐ and high‐dosed animals at study termination, respectively), in comparison with controls, were seen after week 20 and remained lower throughout the study. The treatment caused no adverse effects concerning clinical signs of toxicity, survival rate feed consumption and non‐neoplastic changes and there was no indication of a substance‐related increased tumour incidence in both species.
Rats
A carcinogenicity study performed by NTP in 1982 (Doc. provided to EFSA n.8) and published by Melnick et al., 1983 was performed in groups of 50 F344 rats of either sex exposed to agar via diet (mixed to the feed, no solvent) at concentrations of 0, 25,000 or 50,000 mg agar/kg diet (equivalent to 0, 1,250 or 2,500 mg agar/kg bw per day in rat) for 103 weeks according to the same design than the mice study above. The treatment caused no adverse effects concerning clinical signs of toxicity, survival rate, feed consumption and non‐neoplastic changes, and there was no indication of a substance‐related increased tumour incidence in both species. Therefore, the Panel considered that there was no indication for a carcinogenic potential and that no adverse effects were observed at 2,500 mg agar/kg bw per day, the highest dose tested.
Initiation–promotion studies
The Panel noted a study which had investigated potential enhancement of agar on the development of cancer in animal models treated with an initiating agent (Glauert et al., 1981). The Panel did not consider this study relevant to the risk assessment of agar as a food additive.
No studies available.
In all studies performed by the Food and Drug Research Laboratories (Doc. provided to EFSA n.3) described below, body weights were recorded at regular intervals during gestation and all animals were observed daily for appearance and behaviour. Animals were administered by gavage (1.0 mL/kg bw) different doses of agar (not specified) suspended in anhydrous corn oil; the control groups were vehicle‐treated. All dams were subjected to caesarean section, and the numbers of implantation sites, resorption sites, live and dead fetuses, and body weights of live pups were recorded. All fetuses were examined grossly for sex distribution and for external abnormalities (one‐third detailed visceral examination and two‐third stained and examined for skeletal defects).
Mice
CD‐1 mice were treated by oral gavage once daily from gestation day (GD) 6 to 15 with doses of 0, 15.7, 72.9, 329 or 1,570 mg/kg bw per day agar in corn oil (23, 24, 25, 25, and 48 mated females/group, respectively). This resulted in groups with 22, 20, 23, 24 and 20 pregnancies, which all survived to term, except those in the highest dose group (1,570 mg/kg bw per day) (Doc. provided to EFSA n.3). At necropsy on GD 17, the surviving dams appeared to be completely normal and the number of implantations and live fetuses was comparable to the control group, except in the highest dose group of 1,570 mg/kg bw per day. In this treatment group, a significantly increased mortality in dams (9 out of 48 animals) and a decrease in the pregnancy rate (42%) of survivors were observed. At doses up to 329 mg agar/kg bw per day, no effects were found on implantation, maternal and fetal survival and on the numbers of live or dead fetuses, resorptions, and on fetal weights. However, a marked increase in the number of resorptions and a significant growth retardation of live fetuses (with decreased fetal weights and incomplete ossification) were observed at the highest dose (1,570 mg/kg bw per day). The sex distribution of fetuses was not affected by the treatment. The number of abnormalities seen in either soft tissues or skeletons at fetal examination of the agar‐treated groups did not differ from the vehicle‐treated control group (Doc. provided to EFSA n.3). The Panel noted that the no‐observed‐adverse‐effect‐level (NOAEL) in this study was 329 mg agar/kg bw per day for both maternal and developmental toxicity.
Rats
Pregnant Wistar rats (25/group) were treated by oral gavage once daily from GD 6 to 15 with doses of 0, 11.4, 53, 247 or 1,140 mg/kg bw per day of agar in corn oil (Doc. provided to EFSA n.3). At necropsy on GD 20, the dams treated with doses up to 1,140 mg agar/kg bw per day appeared to be completely normal and had no effects on implantation nor on maternal and fetal survival. The numbers of live or dead fetuses, resorptions, average implantations and fetal weights did not differ amongst the groups. The sex distribution of fetuses was not affected by the treatment. The number of abnormalities seen in either soft tissues or skeletons at fetal pathological examination of the agar‐treated groups, did not differ from the number occurring in the vehicle‐treated dams of the control group. Even at the highest dose level of 1,140 mg/kg bw per day, no adverse effects on both dams and fetuses were noted (Doc. provided to EFSA n.3). The Panel noted that the NOAEL for both maternal and developmental toxicity was 1,140 mg agar/kg bw per day, the highest dose tested.
Hamsters
Pregnant Golden hamsters (25–30 animals/group) were treated by oral gavage once daily from GD 6 to 10 of gestation with doses of 0, 6.5, 30.2, 140.3 or 650 mg agar/kg bw per day in corn oil (Doc. provided to EFSA n.3). At necropsy on GD 14, the dams treated with doses up to 650 mg agar/kg bw per day appeared to be completely normal and showed no effects on implantation nor on maternal and fetal survival. The numbers of live or dead fetuses, resorptions, average implant sites or fetal weights did not differ amongst the groups. The sex distribution of fetuses was not affected by the treatment. The number of abnormalities seen in either soft tissues or skeletons at fetal pathological examination of the agar‐treated groups, did not differ from the number occurring in vehicle‐treated dams of the control group (Doc. provided to EFSA n.3). The Panel noted that the NOAEL for both maternal and developmental toxicity was 650 mg agar/kg bw per day, the highest dose tested.
Rabbits
Artificially inseminated Dutch‐belted rabbits were treated by oral gavage once daily from GD 6 to 18 with doses of 0, 5.5, 25.6, 118.5 or 400 mg/kg bw per day of agar in corn oil (21, 15, 15, 15 or 25 mated females/group, respectively) (Doc. provided to EFSA n.3). At term (GD 29), the mortality of the dams was 3/21, 3/17, 1/15, 0/15 and 9/25 dosed with 0, 5.5, 25.6, 118.5 and 400 mg/kg bw per day agar, respectively. The authors concluded that there was an evident maternal lethality in the highest dose group. Those dams, surviving, appeared normal throughout the observation period. No effect was observed on the number of implantations. At caesarean section, the pregnant rabbits appeared to have normal fetuses (Doc. provided to EFSA n.3). The Panel noted that the NOAEL for maternal lethality/toxicity was 118.5 mg agar/kg bw per day, and that the NOAEL for developmental toxicity was 400 mg agar/kg agar bw per day, the highest doses tested.
The Panel noted that the mortality observed in female mice at 1,570 mg/kg bw per day and in female rabbits at 400 mg/kg bw per day was not in line with the findings from acute toxicity studies (Bailey and Morgareidge (1976). This effect was not observed in other species. The Panel noted that the mortality could be caused by the difficulty of dosing mice and rabbits with a viscous solution. Therefore, the Panel considered the maternal toxicity in these two species as not relevant for the risk assessment.
Overall, no data on fertility effects were available. The Panel considered the available prenatal developmental toxicity studies in mice and rabbits not suitable for the risk assessment due to high maternal toxicity (mortality). In the prenatal developmental toxicity studies in rats and hamsters, no maternal and developmental effects were observed up to the highest dose tested (1,140 and 650 mg agar/kg bw per day, respectively) (Doc. provided to EFSA n.3).
The effect of polysaccharides, including agar, fed at the 10% level in a semisynthetic diet (equivalent to 1,200 mg/kg bw per day) on absorption of Ca, Fe, Zn, Cu, Cr and Co, on weight gain and on faecal dry matter excretion was studied over a period of 8 days in five groups of 12 weanling male rats each and compared to a control group (Harmuth‐Hoene and Schelenz, 1980). Agar reduced significantly the absorption of all minerals tested. When agar was fed continuously over 21 weeks (same dose), interference with the absorption of iron and copper was most pronounced during the initial phase of rapid animal growth. In the case of zinc, chromium and cobalt absorption was reduced significantly during the entire study. In these animals, the increased faecal losses of minerals caused by ingestion of agar were not reflected in total mineral content of carcasses at the completion of the 21‐week feeding trial.
Case reports
A 64‐year‐old woman with a gastric bypass for morbid obesity experienced nausea, vomiting and dysphagia over 72 h after ingestion of an agar‐based dessert. A gastric agar bezoar was detected 2 weeks later and removed (Gero et al., 2015).
A 70‐year‐old Japanese woman was presented to the emergency room with abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. Forty‐eight hours prior to admission, she had eaten a large amount of highly concentrated agar dissolved in boiling water. Bezoars, considered to have formed from the agar, were found impacted in the distal jejunum and removed by surgery. The woman had been diagnosed with type‐2 diabetes 6 years earlier and reported to take dietary agar sometimes (Osada et al., 2008). Two additional cases of bezoar formation after drinking agar solutions have been reported (Sugiyama et al., 2009).
The Panel considered these cases as not relevant for the safety evaluation of the food additive use of agar (E 406) in food for the general population, since agar was either consumed for dietary purposes in large amounts (Osada et al., 2008; Sugiyama et al., 2009) or under the special medical conditions of a patient with a gastric bypass (Gero et al., 2015).
Clinical studies
Maeda et al. (2005) evaluated the efficacy of an agar diet in combination with a conventional diet (traditional Japanese food) for obese patients with impaired glucose tolerance and type‐2 diabetes. After a 4‐week run‐in period on their habitual diets, 76 patients were randomly assigned to have conventional diet or conventional diet with agar. The agar‐diet subjects received 180 g of jelly‐like preparation containing 4.5 g agar, seasoned with condiments, each day 15 min before the evening meal. Both groups were on these diets for 12 weeks. Body weight, body mass index (BMI), glycaemic control, blood pressure, insulin resistance, total body fat, fat distribution and lipids were assessed before and after the experimental period. After 12 weeks, mean changes of body weight, BMI values and total cholesterol were significantly greater in the agar‐diet group than in the conventional diet group. The agar diet resulted in marked weight loss due to the maintenance of reduced calorie intake and to an improvement in metabolic parameters. According to the authors, the 38 participants in the agar‐diet group completed the 12‐week experiment without noticeable side effects.
Pharmaceutical uses
The action of agar is described as a mild laxative, due to its swelling properties. The intake of agar is thought to cause an increase in the bulk of the content of the intestine which stimulates the intestinal muscles, thereby aiding peristalsis. No adverse effects are described and the posology is given with three times daily 1–2 teaspoons (a teaspoon of 5 mL corresponds to 2.75 g agar resulting in a daily dose of up to 16.5 g) together with liquids (Heber, 2007).
From data provided by European Medicines Agency (EMA), information about the current medicinal usage of agar and the usage as an excipient in medicinal products was retrieved (Doc. Provided to EFSA n.1). For agar as an active ingredient, only few authorised medicinal products exist (or existed) within the EU (as combination with other active ingredients). In those combination products, the daily dosage of agar is claimed with up to 900 mg (up to three times daily 300 mg) as an adjuvant in treatment of obesity. Intestinal stenosis is mentioned as a contraindication. The patient is furthermore warned that prudence in case of megacolon due to altered colic motility confined to bed (faecalome risk). As side effect, meteorism especially in the beginning of the treatment is mentioned. Usage in pregnancy and lactation is possible if medically needed (it is claimed that no absorption occurs). The usage in children is not foreseen.24
Also in literature, bowel obstruction and abnormal oesophageal or intestinal narrowing are mentioned as contraindication for agar as a mild laxative (Duke, 2002; Gardner and McGuffin, 2013).
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) concluded that for over‐the‐counter (OTC) drug products for human use, containing agar or another water‐soluble gum, hydrophilic gum, or hydrophilic mucilloid as an active ingredient, when marketed in a dry or incompletely hydrated form (e.g. capsules, granules, powders, tablets, wafers) the following labelling is needed to prevent oesophageal obstruction or asphyxiation: ‘Taking this product without adequate fluid may cause it to swell and block your throat or esophagus and may cause choking. Do not take this product if you have difficulty in swallowing. If you experience chest pain, vomiting, or difficulty in swallowing or breathing after taking this product, seek immediate medical attention’ (FDA, 2016).
The results of literature research did not reveal any published case reports of oesophageal obstruction or asphyxiation associated with the intake of agar in solid/dehydrated forms.
Agar is extracted from certain strains of marine algae of the families Gelidiaceae and Gracilariaceae and relevant red algae of the class Rhodophyceae (Commission Regulation (EU) No 231/2012). Agar has the CAS Registry Number 9002‐18‐0, and the EINECS No 232‐658‐1.
Agar (E 406) is defined as a hydrophilic colloidal polysaccharide consisting mainly of galactose units with a regular alternation of l‐ and d‐isomeric forms. These hexoses are alternately linked with alpha‐1,3 and beta‐1,4 bonds in the copolymer. On about every tenth d‐galactopyranose unit, one of the hydroxyl groups is esterified with sulfuric acid, which is neutralised by calcium, magnesium, potassium or sodium.
Degradation of agar has been investigated in an in vitro human model. This study demonstrated that agar would be partially fermented during its passage through the large intestine by the action of the intestinal tract microflora. The rate of hydrolysis in the gastrointestinal tract in humans is unknown; however, the Panel considered that agar is unlikely to be absorbed unchanged, and that the limited extent of fermentation of agar would lead to products such as SCFA. Based on the available knowledge on the role of SCFA as end products of the fermentation of dietary fibres by the anaerobic intestinal microflora (Topping and Clifton, 2001; Den Besten et al., 2013), the Panel considered that their potential formation as fermentation products from agar does not raise any concern.
The acute toxicity of agar in mice, rats and rabbits is low.
Two dose range‐finding subchronic toxicity studies have been performed by NTP in 1982 (Doc. provided to EFSA n.8) in mice (0, 629, 1,260, 2,500, 5,000 or 10,000 mg/kg bw per day) and rats (0, 279, 567, 1,125, 2,250 or 4,500 mg/kg bw per day). No adverse effects have been identified up to 10,000 in mice and 4,500 mg/kg bw per day in rat, the highest dose tested. The Panel noted that the NTP studies did not include haematology, urinalysis and clinical chemistry.
No genotoxic activity was observed in the available in vitro and in vivo genotoxicity assays with agar. The Panel noted that the package of available studies was limited, but also that agar is routinely used as substrate in in vitro gene mutation assays in bacteria and mammalian cells. Overall, considering its chemical structure and negligible absorption, the Panel concluded that there is no concern with respect to the genotoxicity of agar (E 406).
No chronic toxicity studies according to OECD guidelines (452) or equivalent have been identified by the Panel.
In carcinogenicity studies by NTP (Doc. provided to EFSA n.8; Melnick et al., 1983), no indication of a substance‐related increased tumour incidence was reported. The authors stated that under the experimental conditions used, agar was not carcinogenic to mice and rats at the highest doses tested (up to 4,500 or 2,500 mg/kg bw per day, respectively). The Panel agreed with the authors.
No data on fertility effects were available. In the prenatal developmental toxicity studies in rats and hamsters, no maternal and developmental effects were observed up to the highest dose tested (1,140 and 650 mg agar/kg bw per day, respectively) (Doc. provided to EFSA n.3).
According to the conceptual framework for the risk assessment of certain food additives re‐evaluated under Commission Regulation (EU) No 257/2010 (EFSA, 2014), the Panel considered that sufficient toxicity studies were available showing no adverse effects at the highest doses tested. Therefore, the Panel considered that there is no need to allocate a numerical ADI for agar (E 406).
In literature, there is also information about the usage of agar as an adjuvant in the treatment of diabetes and/or obesity (Maeda et al., 2005). This study did not show noticeable side effects in participants receiving a daily dose of 4.5 g agar for 12 weeks.
No adverse effects were described for agar as a mild laxative in single doses from 2.75 to 5.5 g or in daily doses from 4 to 16.5 g administered with sufficient fluids, but intestinal stenosis was given as a contraindication (Heber, 2007).
Agar (E 406) is authorised in a wide range of foods but reported by industry to be used in a limited number of food categories (9/70). According to the Panel, it is not expected that brand loyalty will result in higher exposure in the general population, except in specific populations consuming foods belonging to the food categories 13.2, 13.3 and 13.4 (see Table 2). The Panel therefore selected the non‐brand‐loyal refined scenario as the most relevant exposure scenario for this additive.
In the maximum level and refined scenarios, only seven food categories (out of 70 in which agar is authorised in the Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008) for which data have been reported by industry, were included. The Panel considered that the uncertainties identified would result in an overestimation of exposure for these seven food categories.
Considering information from the Mintel GNPD, only approximately 50% of the food products labelled with agar (E 406) belonged to food subcategories for which reported use levels were available, and consequently used in the exposure assessment. The Panel noted that given the information from the Mintel GNPD it may be assumed that agar is used in food categories for which no data have been provided by food industry. If this is confirmed, the present assessment would therefore result in an underestimation of the exposure.
The Panel further noted that the exposure to agar from its use according the Annex III (Part 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 section A) was not considered in the exposure assessment.
The Panel also noted that the refined exposure estimates are based on information provided on the reported level of use of agar (E 406). If actual practice changes, this refined estimates may no longer be representative and should be updated.
According to the conceptual framework for the risk assessment of certain food additives re‐evaluated under Commission Regulation (EU) No 257/2010 (EFSA, 2014) and given that:
the safety assessment carried out by the Panel is limited to the use and use levels in seven food categories for which data were considered in this opinion out of the 70 food categories in which agar (E 406) is authorised;an indicative high refined exposure assessment up to 26 mg/kg bw per day has been calculated in toddlers at the 95th percentile (non‐brand‐loyal scenario);agar is unlikely to be absorbed unchanged and is slightly fermented by intestinal microbiota;sufficient toxicity data were available;there is no concern with respect to the genotoxicity of agar (E 406);no carcinogenic effects were reported in carcinogenicity studies in mice and rats at the doses of 4,500 mg/kg bw per day and 2,500 mg/kg bw per day, respectively, the highest doses tested;oral intake of agar (4,500 mg/person corresponding to 64 mg/kg bw per day) was tolerated in humans for 12 weeks without noticeable side effects,
the Panel concluded that there is no need for a numerical ADI for agar, and that there is no safety concern for the general population at the refined exposure assessment for the reported uses of agar as food additive.
The Panel recommended that the maximum limits for the impurities of toxic elements (lead, mercury, cadmium and arsenic) in the EU specification for agar (E 406) should be revised in order to ensure that agar (E 406) as a food additive will not be a significant source of exposure to those toxic elements in food, in particular for infants and children.
The Panel recommended that information on the possible use of formaldehyde should be provided since no such information was made available following the call for data.a
Due to the discrepancies observed between the data reported from industry and Mintel database, where agar is labelled in more products than in food categories for which data were reported from industry, the Panel recommended collection of data of usage and use levels of agar (E 406) in order to perform a more realistic exposure assessment.
European Medicines Agency (EMA) communication to EFSA request in 4 May 2015, for information on a certain group of substances used as food additives, June 2015.Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB), prepared for Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 1973. Evaluation of the health aspects of agar‐agar as a food ingredient. Submitted by Hispanagar and Marinalg in 2010.Food and Drug Research Laboratories (FDRL) Inc., prepared for Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 1973. Teratologic Evaluation of FDA 71‐53 (Agar‐agar): Teratologic test results in four species (rats, mice, hamsters and rabbits. Submitted by Hispanagar and Marinalg in 2010.Hispanagar S.A., 2010. Reply to EFSA: Call for data on emulsifier, stabiliser and gelling agents. Information on chemistry and specification, manufacturing process, present usage, and other studies. Submitted to EFSA in 2010.Informatics Inc., prepared for Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 1972. GRAS (Generally Recognized as Safe) Food Ingredients – Agar‐Agar. Submitted by Marinalg in 2010.Litton Bionetic Inc., prepared for Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 1974. Mutagenic evaluation of compound FDA 71‐53, powdered agar. Mutagenic test results in 3 systems‐ Host mediated Assay in vitro and in vivo; Cytogenetics in vitro and in vivo; Dominant lethal in vivo. Submitted by Hispanagar and Marinalg in 2010.Marinalg International., 2010. Reply to EFSA: Call for data on emulsifier, stabiliser and gelling agents. Information on chemistry and specification, ADME, subchronic toxicity, genotoxicity, chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity, reproduction and developmental toxicity, other studies. Submitted to EFSA in 2010.NTP (National Toxicology Program), 1982. Carcinogenesis bioassay of agar in F344 rats and B6C3F1 mice (feed study). Technical Report Series, 230. Submitted by Marinalg in 2010.Pre‐evaluation document prepared by Fraunhofer ITEM, October 2012.Babbi confectionery industry, 2014. Data on usage levels of agar (E 406) in foods in response to the EFSA call for food additives usage level and/or concentration data in food and beverages intended for human consumption (2014). Submitted to EFSA on 12 August 2014.Biovegan GmbH, 2014. Data on usage levels of agar (E 406) in foods in response to the EFSA call for food additives usage level and/or concentration data in food and beverages intended for human consumption (2014). Submitted to EFSA on 4 June 2014.FDE (FoodDrinkEurope), 2014. Data on usage levels of agar (E 406) in foods in response to the EFSA call for food additives usage level and/or concentration data in food and beverages intended for human consumption (2014). Submitted to EFSA on 30 September 2014.ICGA (International Chewing Gum Association), 2014. Data on usage levels of agar (E 406) in foods in response to the EFSA call for food additives usage level and/or concentration data in food and beverages intended for human consumption (2014). Submitted to EFSA on 30 September 2014.Interested party 1, 2014. Data on usage levels of agar (E 406) in foods in response to the EFSA call for food additives usage level and/or concentration data in food and beverages intended for human consumption (2014). Submitted to EFSA on 4 July 2014.
ADIacceptable daily intakeAFCEFSA Former Panel on Additives, Flavourings, Processing Aids and Materials in Contact with FoodANS PanelEFSA Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to FoodBMIbody mass indexBPCBritish Pharmaceutical CodexCASChemical Abstracts ServiceDEAEdiethylaminoethyl celluloseEMAEuropean Medicines AgencyEINECSEuropean Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical SubstancesFCSFood Classification SystemFDAFood and Drug AdministrationFDEFoodDrinkEuropeFDRLFood and Drug Research LaboratoriesGDgestation dayGNPDGlobal New Products DatabaseICGAInternational Chewing Gum AssociationIPCSInternational Programme on Chemical SafetyIRinfrared (spectroscopy)JECFAJoint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food AdditivesLCliquid chromatographyLD50 lethal doseMPLmaximum permitted levelNOAELno‐observed‐adverse‐effect‐levelNTPNational Toxicology ProgramOTCover‐the‐counterQS quantum satis SCFScientific Committee for FoodSmPCsummary of product characteristicsTDItolerable daily intakeTMDItheoretical maximum daily intake
Food Category numberFood category nameE‐Number/GroupMPLRestrictionsNrUsage level typicalUsage level maxProvider NameCommentsMeanMinMax01.4Flavoured fermented milk products including heat treated productsGroup IQS1340.0356.0FDE03Edible icesGroup IQS190.0a 150.0a Interested party 1Original level provided for semifinish product. This semiproduct are added 100 g inside 1 kg of finished product03Edible icesGroup IQS594.00.0470.01162.0FDE04.2.4.1Fruit and vegetable preparations excluding compoteGroup IQS187.5150.0FDESpecifically reported for ‘fruit filling for pastry application’05.1Cocoa and Chocolate products as covered by Directive 2000/36/ECGroup IQSOnly energy‐reduced or with no added sugar1141.02881.0FDE05.3Chewing gumGroup IQS18800.018000.0ICGA05.4Decorations, coatings and fillings, except fruit based fillings covered by category 4.2.4Group IQS116000.020000.0Interested party 105.4Decorations, coatings and fillings, except fruit based fillings covered by category 4.2.4Group IQS3140.125.0370.0720.0FDEUsage level as expressed in the pastry application, in the cream filling05.4Decorations, coatings and fillings, except fruit‐based fillings covered by category 4.2.4Group IQS116000.016000.0BABBI Confectionery IndustryLevels provided ‘sweet sauces for desserts’05.4Decorations, coatings and fillings, except fruit‐based fillings covered by category 4.2.4Group IQS1 NP0.30.3Biovegan GmbHLevels provided for ‘instant powder for different kind of glazes, vegan, organic’08.3.1Meat preparations as defined by Regulation (EC) No 853/2004140.0a 237.5a FDEInitial levels provided for ‘the seasoning or extracts as consumed for example in a sausage, will be much lower as only a small percentage (between 2.5‐10%)’16Desserts excluding products covered in category 1, 3 and 4Group IQS22079.1103.04055.14055.1FDE18Group IQS2 NP0.5250.051.01.0Biovegan GmbHLevels provided as ‘pure agar’/‘gelling agent for different kinds of products: aspic, confectionery, fruit spread’MPL: maximum permitted level; FDE: FoodDrinkEurope; ICGA: International Chewing Gum Association.aApplication of a factor 10 on the initial levels provided.
Mintel subcategoryTotal number of productsProducts labelled with agar (E 406)Number%Mixed assortments271145.2Chilled desserts5,5822083.7Non‐individually wrapped chocolate pieces4,6871372.9Caramel & cream spreads24372.9Pastilles, gums, jellies & chews3,346812.4Other frozen desserts1,419322.3Shelf‐stable desserts2,945501.7Soft cheese desserts1,365211.5Curd & quark849131.5Liquorice69091.3Processed cheese1,876231.2Meat pastes & pates2,776331.2Cakes, pastries & sweet goods11,8541361.1Confiture & fruit spreads4,266461.1Cream1,454141.0Seasonal chocolate4,962470.9Marshmallows43140.9Chocolate countlines2,059190.9Medicated confectionery89180.9Soy‐based drinks60950.8Dairy‐based frozen products7,001490.7Salads2,334160.7Sandwich fillers/spreads90160.7Individually wrapped chocolate pieces2,296150.7Water‐based frozen desserts1,07270.7Baking ingredients & mixes8,031440.5Snack/cereal/energy bars4,232210.5Meat substitutes1,90890.5Growing up milk (1‐4 years)22310.4Dips1,28250.4Standard & power mints78730.4Other chocolate confectionery26310.4Other sugar confectionery95030.3Poultry products5,483170.3Rice snacks35110.3Soy yogurt35510.3Meat products13,984340.2Other sauces & seasonings85120.2Chocolate spreads97920.2Fresh cheese & cream cheese2,45750.2Instant noodles99520.2Hors d'oeuvres/canapes3,63070.2Dessert toppings57310.2Other natural sweeteners59110.2Prepared meals9,894160.2Flavoured milk1,27220.2Nut spreads64510.2Chocolate tablets7,344110.1Savoury vegetable pastes/spreads1,41620.1RTD (iced) coffee76810.1Mayonnaise80210.1Sandwiches/wraps2,40630.1Table sauces5,37660.1Fruit snacks2,89230.1Sweet biscuits/cookies15,483160.1Pasta8,87480.1Soft cheese & semi‐soft cheese4,99540.1Fish products10,92070.1Pickled condiments5,00330.1Wheat & other grain‐based snacks1,69010.1Meal kits1,80910.1Stuffing, polenta & other side dishes1,99910.1Cold cereals5,47220.0Drinking yogurt & liquid cultured milk2,88610.0Hard cheese & semi‐hard cheese5,90220.0Dressings & vinegar3,03510.0Vegetables9,28330.0Wet soup3,75110.0Pizzas3,88610.0Cooking sauces4,44610.0Spoonable yogurt8,75310.0Bread & bread products8,92610.0 Total Sample 254,032 1,261 0.5
Food category numberFood categories nameRestrictions/exceptionsMPLConcentration levels used in the refined exposure assessment scenario (only reported use levels)CommentsMeanMaximum01.3Unflavoured fermented milk products, heat‐treated after fermentationQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)01.4Flavoured fermented milk products including heat treated productsQS340356Reported use levels01.6.2Unflavoured live fermented cream products and substitute products with a fat content of less than 20%QS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)01.6.3Other creamsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data and no FoodEx code)01.7.1Unripened cheese excluding products falling in category 16Except mozzarellaQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)01.7.5Processed cheeseQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)01.7.6Cheese products (excluding products falling in category 16)QS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)01.8Dairy analogues, including beverage whitenersQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)02.2.2Other fat and oil emulsions including spreads as defined by Council Regulation (EC) No 1234/2007 and liquid emulsionsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)02.3Vegetable oil pan sprayQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data and no FoodEx code)03Edible icesQS921,162Reported use levels04.2.1Dried fruit and vegetablesQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)04.2.2Fruit and vegetables in vinegar, oil, or brineQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)04.2.4.1Fruit and vegetable preparations excluding compoteQS––Not taken into account (no FoodEx code for ‘fruit filling’)04.2.5.2Jam, jellies and marmalades and sweetened chestnut puree as defined by Directive 2001/113/EC(b)10 000––Not taken into account (no concentration data)04.2.5.3Other similar fruit or vegetable spreads(b)10 000––Not taken into account (no concentration data)04.2.5.4Nut butters and nut spreadsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)04.2.6Processed potato productsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)05.1Cocoa and chocolate products as covered by Directive 2000/36/ECOnly energy‐reduced or with no added sugarQS1412,881Reported use levels05.2Other confectionery including breath refreshening microsweetsE 406 may not be used in jelly mini‐cups, defined, for the purpose of this Regulation, as jelly confectionery of a firm consistence, contained in semi rigid mini‐cups or mini‐capsules, intended to be ingested in a single bite by exerting pressure on the mini‐cups or mini‐capsule to project the confectionery into the mouthQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)05.3Chewing gumQS880018000Reported use levels05.4Decorations, coatings and fillings, except fruit based fillings covered by category 4.2.4QS––Not taken into account (no FoodEx code)06.2.2StarchesQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)06.3Breakfast cerealsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)06.4.2Dry pastaOnly gluten free and/or pasta intended for hypoproteic diets in accordance with Directive 2009/39/ECQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)06.4.4Potato GnocchiExcept fresh refrigerated potato gnocchiQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)06.4.5Fillings of stuffed pasta (ravioli and similar)QS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)06.5NoodlesQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)06.6BattersQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data and no FoodEx code)06.7Pre‐cooked or processed cerealsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data and no FoodEx code)07.1Bread and rollsExcept products in 7.1.1 and 7.1.2QS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)07.2Fine bakery waresQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)08.3.1Non‐heat‐treated meat productsQS40237.5Reported use levels for the FC 08.3.1, used for both categories of meat products08.3.2Heat‐treated meat productsExcept foie gras, foie gras entier, blocs de foie gras, Libamáj, libamáj egészben, libamáj tömbbenQS08.3.3Casings and coatings and decorations for meatQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data and no FoodEx code)09.2Processed fish and fishery products including molluscs and crustaceansQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)09.3Fish roeOnly processed fish roeQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)10.2Processed eggs and egg productsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)11.2Other sugars and syrupsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)12.1.2Salt substitutesQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)12.2.2Seasonings and condimentsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)12.3VinegarsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)12.4MustardQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)12.5Soups and brothsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)12.6SaucesQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)12.7Salads and savoury based sandwich spreadsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)12.8Yeast and yeast productsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)12.9Protein products, excluding products covered in category 1.8QS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)13.2Dietary foods for special medical purposes defined in Directive 1999/21/EC (excluding products from food category 13.1.5)Only foods in tablet and coated tablet formatQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)13.3Dietary foods for weight control diets intended to replace total daily food intake or an individual meal (the whole or part of the total daily diet)QS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)13.4Foods suitable for people intolerant to gluten as defined by Regulation (EC) No 41/2009Including dry pastaQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)14.1.2Fruit juices as defined by Directive 2001/112/EC and vegetable juicesOnly vegetable juicesQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)14.1.3Fruit nectars as defined by Directive 2001/112/EC and vegetable nectars and similar productsOnly vegetable nectarsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)14.1.4Flavoured drinksQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)14.1.5.2OtherExcluding unflavoured leaf tea; including flavoured instant coffeeQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)14.2.3Cider and perryQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)14.2.4Fruit wine and made wineQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)14.2.5MeadQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)14.2.6Spirit drinks as defined in Regulation (EC) No 110/2008Except whisky or whiskeyQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)14.2.7.1Aromatised winesQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)14.2.7.2Aromatised wine‐based drinksQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)14.2.7.3Aromatised wine‐product cocktailsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)14.2.8Other alcoholic drinks including mixtures of alcoholic drinks with non‐alcoholic drinks and spirits with less than 15% of alcoholQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)15.1Potato‐, cereal‐, flour‐ or starch‐based snacksQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)15.2Processed nutsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)16Desserts excluding products covered in category 1, 3 and 4QS20794,055Reported use levels17.1Food supplements supplied in a solid form including capsules and tablets and similar forms, excluding chewable formsQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)17.2Food supplements supplied in a liquid formQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)17.3Food supplements supplied in a syrup‐type or chewable formQS––Not taken into account (no concentration data)18Processed foods not covered by categories 1–17, excluding foods for infants and young childrenQS––Not taken into account (no usable concentration data)MPL: maximum permitted level; QS: quantum satis.
Number of subjectsMPL scenarioBrand‐loyal scenarioNon‐brand‐loyal scenarioMeanP95MeanP95MeanP95 Infants Bulgaria (NUTRICHILD)6590.10.60.10.60.10.1Germany (VELS)1591.27.71.16.80.63.6Denmark (IAT 2006_07)8262.613.42.412.01.58.0Finland (DIPP_2001_2009)5000.010.00.010.00.010.0United Kingdom (DNSIYC_2011)1,3663.820.93.619.62.010.5Italy (INRAN_SCAI_2005_06)120.5–0.5–0.1– Toddlers Belgium (Regional_Flanders)3611.9–9.4–4.7–Bulgaria (NUTRICHILD)4281.05.60.95.10.21.5Germany (VELS)3487.724.36.321.43.311.5Denmark (IAT 2006_07)9174.814.33.611.42.07.4Spain (enKid)179.9–8.4–4.9–Finland (DIPP_2001_2009)5001.76.71.56.21.35.4United Kingdom (NDNS‐RollingProgrammeYears1‐3)1856.424.85.722.22.811.8United Kingdom (DNSIYC_2011)1,3146.226.35.724.93.013.5Italy (INRAN_SCAI_2005_06)362.1–1.8–1.0–Netherlands (VCP_kids)32217.048.714.844.58.426.2 Children Austria (ASNS_Children)1283.18.52.66.80.63.0Belgium (Regional_Flanders)62510.226.78.222.54.514.2Bulgaria (NUTRICHILD)4331.97.31.76.80.20.6Czech Republic (SISP04)3895.416.64.313.91.67.0Germany (EsKiMo)8354.412.43.610.11.14.7Germany (VELS)2938.623.06.519.73.311.0Denmark (DANSDA 2005‐08)2983.79.22.66.60.93.6Spain (enKid)1566.723.05.519.62.610.1Spain (NUT_INK05)3994.315.13.614.51.57.2Finland (DIPP_2001_2009)7504.28.63.16.61.54.4France (INCA2)4828.221.96.518.83.210.0United Kingdom (NDNS‐RollingProgrammeYears1‐3)6514.915.04.012.41.76.4Greece (Regional_Crete)8382.27.61.96.60.62.6Italy (INRAN_SCAI_2005_06)1932.37.31.95.50.41.7Latvia (EFSA_TEST)1873.613.53.011.30.94.2Netherlands (VCP_kids)95713.937.611.634.26.619.6Netherlands (VCPBasis_AVL2007_2010)4479.828.08.124.34.313.9Sweden (NFA)1,4734.511.23.59.01.74.8 Adolescents Austria (ASNS_Children)2371.24.51.03.50.20.8Belgium (Diet_National_2004)5762.06.31.85.10.42.5Cyprus (Childhealth)3030.93.20.82.70.10.5Czech Republic (SISP04)2982.58.12.06.40.72.3Germany (National_Nutrition_Survey_II)1,0111.56.41.35.50.52.7Germany (EsKiMo)3932.87.72.36.10.52.5Denmark (DANSDA 2005‐08)3772.06.21.54.40.51.8Spain (AESAN_FIAB)861.44.41.13.90.31.7Spain (enKid)2093.19.72.46.81.03.9Spain (NUT_INK05)6512.06.61.75.90.62.7Finland (NWSSP07_08)3061.94.71.53.60.82.0France (INCA2)9733.610.02.88.51.34.4United Kingdom (NDNS‐RollingProgrammeYears1‐3)6662.06.81.65.50.62.7Italy (INRAN_SCAI_2005_06)2471.24.11.03.50.20.8Latvia (EFSA_TEST)4532.28.31.87.00.42.6Netherlands (VCPBasis_AVL2007_2010)1,1425.115.84.214.12.17.7Sweden (NFA)1,0182.47.51.95.60.82.8 Adults Austria (ASNS_Adults)3081.15.71.05.00.42.3Belgium (Diet_National_2004)1,2921.45.41.24.60.42.1Czech Republic (SISP04)1,6660.82.70.72.30.31.0Germany (National_Nutrition_Survey_II)10,4191.14.61.04.00.41.9Denmark (DANSDA 2005‐08)1,7391.03.40.82.60.31.2Spain (AESAN)4100.94.00.83.10.21.5Spain (AESAN_FIAB)9810.93.50.73.10.21.4Finland (FINDIET2012)1,2951.56.01.35.20.72.9France (INCA2)2,2761.76.01.45.20.72.7United Kingdom (NDNS‐RollingProgrammeYears1‐3)1,2660.93.40.83.10.31.5Hungary (National_Repr_Surv)1,0740.51.70.41.50.10.4Ireland (NANS_2012)1,2740.72.50.62.10.20.9Italy (INRAN_SCAI_2005_06)2,3130.51.80.41.50.10.6Latvia (EFSA_TEST)1,2710.84.00.73.30.21.2Netherlands (VCPBasis_AVL2007_2010)2,0572.610.02.38.81.14.8Romania (Dieta_Pilot_Adults)1,2540.31.30.31.00.00.2Sweden (Riksmaten 2010)1,4300.93.00.72.50.31.4 The elderly Austria (ASNS_Adults)920.73.30.63.20.21.7Belgium (Diet_National_2004)1,2151.36.41.26.00.53.2Germany (National_Nutrition_Survey_II)2,4960.93.80.83.50.31.8Denmark (DANSDA 2005‐08)2860.72.00.51.60.20.7Finland (FINDIET2012)4130.83.10.72.70.41.8France (INCA2)3481.24.11.13.70.52.1United Kingdom (NDNS‐RollingProgrammeYears1‐3)3051.45.11.24.60.62.5Hungary (National_Repr_Surv)2860.30.80.20.60.10.3Ireland (NANS_2012)2260.83.70.83.70.41.9Italy (INRAN_SCAI_2005_06)5180.21.10.21.10.10.4Netherlands (VCPBasis_AVL2007_2010)1732.18.81.98.51.04.4Netherlands (VCP‐Elderly)7392.69.82.49.31.24.9Romania (Dieta_Pilot_Adults)1280.20.70.10.50.00.1Sweden (Riksmaten 2010)3670.92.90.72.60.31.5MPL: maximum permitted level; p95: 95th percentile.–: p95 of exposure was only calculated for those population groups where the sample size was sufficiently large to allow this calculation (EFSA, 2011a).