Background:Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is one of the most common endocrine disorders in women of reproductive age. The etiopathogenesis of the disease remains uncertain. Additionally, a full consensus has not been reached regarding PCOS diagnostic criteria. Several attempts have been made to diagnose PCOS with a simple clinical biomarker, but most of them failed. This study aims to investigate the possible association between PCOS and anogenital distance (AGD), which is an important sign of intrauterine androgen exposure.Methods:A prospective cohort study was conducted on 130 women. The study group contained 65 women with PCOS whereas 65 healthy women were recruited for the control group, all between 18 and 40 years in age. The groups were compared in terms of demographics and clinical and laboratory parameters. Both anterior and posterior AGDs and associated ratios were recorded for each woman.Results:The mean ratio of anterior AGD to posterior AGD for the PCOS and control group were 4.4 ± 1.0 and 4.9 ± 1.0, respectively (p = 0.003). Regression analysis demonstrated that this ratio significantly and positively correlated with the waist to hip ratio and negatively correlated with the free androgen index.Conclusion:AGD was initially used to define sexual differentiation of animals. Subsequent human studies showed that boys have longer AGDs than girls. Recent studies supporting the hypothesis that extreme prenatal androgen exposure contributes to PCOS found that AGD in adult PCOS patients was longer than control PCOS patients. However, a novel biomarker other than AGD needs to be identified to standardize these measurements. This work represents the first study to evaluate the ratio of anterior AGD to posterior AGD in PCOS patients. In this study, AGD anterior and posterior measurements were longer in PCOS patients than in controls. However, the strongest predictor of PCOS is the ratio of anterior to posterior AGD.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is one of the most common endocrine and reproductive disorders in women of reproductive age. Clinical and laboratory features of PCOS include hyperinsulinemia, luteinizing hormone (LH) hypersecretion, hyperandrogenism, amenorrhea, oligomenorrhea, and infertility.1 The exact pathophysiology of PCOS is unclear. However, it has been proposed that environmental factors, such as excessive intrauterine androgen exposure, as well as genetic factors play a role in the development of PCOS.2 Recently, animal experiments demonstrated that the etiology of PCOS may be associated with excess androgen, which can interfere with the function of the hypothalamus-pituitary gonadal axis and contribute to reproductive dysfunction in adults.3 If excessive prenatal testosterone (T) exposure contributes to the risk of PCOS (as suggested by animal models), then it would be extremely valuable to identify biomarkers of excessive prenatal T at early ages.
Anogenital distance (AGD), a measure of genital development and androgen exposure, has been used to assess the detrimental effects of endocrine disturbing chemicals on the reproductive system in several experimental animals.4 AGD was initially used to define sexual differentiation of animals, as males have 50% to 100% longer anogenital lengths than females. Subsequent studies confirmed these findings in humans, which showed that boys have a 50% to 100% longer AGD than girls. Scott et al found that—in addition to reduced AGD—rodents exposed to certain phthalates, which are known to suppress fetal androgen levels, had altered testicular size and Sertoli cell function.5 In animal models, AGD can be prolonged in females by experimentally increasing the prenatal T environment. For example, exposure of female rodents, rabbits, sheep, and nonhuman primates to fetal male T concentrations during gestation have longer AGDs than controls.6–9
With the limited amount of human data on this subject, interest has increased. Two recent studies found that AGD was longer in adult PCOS patients compared with control PCOS patients, which supports the hypothesis that extreme prenatal androgen exposure contributes to PCOS.10,11 One of these studies found a positive correlation between AGD measurements and levels of circulating T.11 In healthy young women, longer AGDs are linked to multiple follicular ovaries and higher serum T levels.12,13 However, studies of adults do not exclude postnatal efficacy in AGD or ovarian function. Cross-sectional studies with adult women suggest that AGD is positively related to age, is inversely related to the use of hormonal contraception, and may have some plasticity in adulthood.14 In previous studies, AGD was found to be an important biomarker of PCOS. However, only one such study has been performed in adults and, to the best of our knowledge, our current study is the first to evaluate the ratio of anterior to posterior (Ratioant/post) AGD in PCOS patients.
This study evaluated adult Turkish women to investigate whether PCOS is associated with AGD, which is a biomarker of fetal androgen exposure.
Ethical committee approval was obtained from the Liv Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, where the study was conducted. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. The study included 65 women with PCOS and 65 healthy controls, all between the ages of 18 and 40 years. PCOS subjects were recruited from a gynecology outpatient clinic at the current hospital between January 2016 and June 2018. Controls were healthy women with no known disease, who were admitted to the same unit for routine gynecologic examination.
PCOS was diagnosed based on Rotterdam criteria15 in the presence of at least two of the following: (1) oligomenorrhea and/or anovulation, (2) biochemical and/or clinical hyperandrogenism, (3) ultrasound detection of polycystic ovaries (PCO) (multiple cysts >12 in number of 2-9 mm size) along with exclusion of other etiologies such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia, virilising tumor, Cushing syndrome and prolactinoma, diabetes, hypertension, and other cardiovascular diseases. In the 6-month preceding the study, none of the participants took hormonal contraceptives or other medications or were on a diet that could affect lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. None of the subjects smoked or consumed alcohol. The control group consisted of 65 women matched for age and body mass index (BMI), who had regular menses with no clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism or PCO. Patients who had a perineal mass or perineal defect or who had vaginal delivery and an episiotomy were excluded.
Detailed clinical histories were taken and physical examinations were performed on all women. BMI was calculated as body weight (kg) divided by square of body height (m2). Hirsutism scores were evaluated and recorded with the use of the modified Ferriman-Gallwey score (FGS).16 Waist to hip ratio (WHR), which indicates visceral fat accumulation, was calculated by dividing minimal waist circumference by hip circumference at the level of the greater trochanters. Routine laboratory measurements were performed, including estradiol (E2), LH, follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), prolactin (PRL), thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEA-SO4), 17 hydroxy-progesterone (17OH-P), androstenedione, sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG), and total testosterone (TT) levels. Free androgen index (FAI) was used to determine the androgenic status of the participants, which was calculated by dividing the total T level by SHBG, and then multiplying by 100. We obtained AGD measurements from the anterior clitoral surface to the upper verge of the anus (AGDant) and from the posterior fourchette to the upper verge of the anus (AGDpost). AGD Ratioant/post was then calculated.
Ultrasonographic and pelvic examinations were performed by a single physician. Ovaries were considered to be polycystic, based on ultrasound if there were 12 or more follicles measuring 2 to 9 mm in diameter in at least one ovary (polycystic ovarian morphology [PCOM]) and/or an enlarged ovarian volume (>10 mm3). Oligomenorrhea was defined as menstrual cycles lasting longer than 45 days, while amenorrhea was defined as the absence of a menstrual period for three consecutive months. Chronic anovulation was confirmed by serum progesterone levels <5 ng/mL during the mid-luteal phase.
The modified FGS, which assesses all nine body areas, was used to determine the severity of hirsutism. Patients with an FGS score ≥8 were considered to have clinical hirsutism. The presence and severity of acne vulgaris and androgenetic alopecia was evaluated by a previously defined method.17,18 PCOS phenotypes were classified as type A (classical, PCOM + oligomenorrhea + hyperandrogenism), type B (PCOM + hyperandrogenism), and type C (PCOM + oligomenorrhea).
Data were analyzed with SPSS version 22.0 for Windows. The normal distribution suitability of the data was examined by the single sample Shapiro Wilk test and homogeneity of variance was evaluated by using Levene’s test. Results of statistical studies were expressed as mean ± SD or number (percent). In the intergroup comparisons, the t test and the Mann-Whitney U test were used for independent variables and non-normal distribution, respectively. Possible correlation between test Ratioant/post and other parameters were evaluated by using Pearson’s correlation analyses. χ2 or Fisher’s exact test were used for categorical comparison of groups. Linear logistic regression was used to estimate the association between the Ratioant/post and determinants of PCOS. Statistical hypotheses were evaluated based on the two-tailed perception rate. A p value <0.05 was used to indicate statistical significance.
This study continued on with a previously initiated case control study that had finished recruiting 65 female subjects of reproductive age with PCOS as a case group and 65 female subjects of normal ovulatory reproduction without hyperandrogenism as a control group. A total of 130 PCOS and control female reproductive patients aged between 18 and 40 years were included in the study. The mean age was 25.7 ± 3.6 years (range 18-40 years) for PCOS and 26.6 ± 4.3 years (range 20-40 years) for the control group (p > 0.05). As expected, the body weight of women in the PCOS group was higher (p = 0.010), but average heights were similar in both groups (p > 0.05). There was a statistically significant difference between the two groups with respect to BMI and, as expected, it was higher in the PCOS group (27.9 vs 25.8 kg/m2, respectively; p = 0.008). Demographic, physical, and clinical characteristics of the patients are shown in Table 1.
The hormone profiles of the two groups in the early follicular phase were also examined (Table 2). There were no significant differences between the two groups with respect to FSH, E2, DHEA-SO4, 17OH-P, androstenedione, TT, FAI, PRL, and TSH. However, significantly elevated LH and significantly decreased SHBG levels were detected in the PCOS group relative to the control group (p < 0.05 for both).
The PCOS group was allocated into three subgroups: group A (36.9%), group B (32.2%), and group C (30.8%). While hyperandrogenism was present in 45 patients (69.2%) in the PCOS group, this rate was 4.6% (three patients) in the healthy control group, which was statistically different (p < 0.001). In the PCOS group, oligomenorrhea was present in 44 patients (67.7%) and in seven patients (10.8%) in the control group (p < 0.001). Acne findings were 22 (33.8%) in the PCOS group and five (7.7%) in the control group (p < 0.001). Alopecia were present in 27 patients (41.5%) in the PCOS group and in five patients (7.7%) in the control group (p < 0.001) (Table 3).
We found no statistically significant differences in AGDant and AGDpost measurements, although both measurements were longer in the PCOS group (Table 1). The mean values of Ratioant/post were 4.4 ± 1.0 and 4.9 ± 1.0 in the PCOS and control group, respectively (p = 0.003). ROC analyses demonstrated that the AUC was indicative of the Ratioant/post value for predicting PCOS was 0.644, with a 95% confidence interval of 0.549-0.738 (p = 0.005). The cut-off value according to the highest Youden index was calculated to be 4.5, with a sensitivity of 56.0 and specificity of 67.2% (Fig. 1). In further analysis, Ratioant/post was found to be significantly positively correlated with WHR and negatively correlated with FAI (Table 4). These parameters were also found to be risk factors for the Ratioant/post measurement, based on the linear logistic regression analysis (Table 5).
PCOS is one of the most common life long endocrine disorders. For this reason, early recognition of the disease can help to provide a better quality of life, which constitutes the basis of our study. Difficulties in diagnosis are particularly high in the adolescent period. In this patient group, anogenital length measurement has been recently emphasized as part of the question of whether early indications of PCOS can be detected. Herein, we evaluated anterior and posterior AGD in women diagnosed with PCOS, who were compared with PCOS-free healthy controls. Unlike previous studies, we also evaluated Ratioant/post and found it to be novel biomarker when compared with simple and single AGD measurements.
In our study, we determined AGD measurements were longer in the PCOS group. These measurements were similar to recent studies.11,12 Previous studies of AGD revealed that increases in its length were due to intrauterine androgen exposure.19,20 Because the length of AGD varies with intrauterine androgenic exposure and previously published studies indicate that PCOS occurs in the intrauterine environment, postnatal exposure to androgens may also affect AGD in the antenatal period. Previous studies of AGD measurements primarily focused on the early neonatal period.19,20 As women age, individual anthropometric measurements will change, and these changes will be also different from person-to-person. Therefore, standardization and interpretation of AGD measurements is difficult.
Diagnosing PCOS in young women is difficult for several reasons. In our study, we aimed to use standardized AGD as a diagnostic criterion for our patient groups. We believe that the ratio of AGDant to AGDpost will overcome differences arising from individual anthropometric measurements. As new knowledge in the literature, we present the Ratioant/post as a predictor of PCOS.
Genetic effects are present in more than 70% of PCOS etiopathogenesis cases.21,22 In addition, the majority of adolescents with PCOS have a mother with PCOS or a father with a metabolic syndrome. The prevalence of PCOS in mothers and sisters of women with PCOS was found to be 20% to 40% higher than in the general population and, which was interpreted as support for a potential genetic basis of PCOS.23,24 In fact, maternal PCOS is a risk factor for PCOS.25 Twin studies indicated that genetic effects may be involved in the etiopathogenesis of PCOS. Therefore, genetic factors and ethnic origin that may influence perineal length should be kept in mind when evaluating these measurements.
Wu et al found a positive correlation between AGD measurements and T levels, suggesting that high levels of T and a longer AGD may be associated with a hyperandrogenic environment in PCOS.11 The AGD distance was approximately two times longer in males than in females, which was used to determine gender.26 It has been reported that prenatal T treatment can result in virilization of genitalia in female rhesus monkeys2 and female sheep.27Administering T propionate during pregnancy has also been shown to increase AGD distance in female rats.28
Our study has some limitations. Measurement, selection, and prejudice must always be considered. Nevertheless, the control group consisted of women who applied to the same hospital during the study period and came from the same population as the test cases. AGD measurements were performed by a gynecologist who was not aware of the patient’s condition and was not involved in the diagnosis of PCOS. Although misclassification of the PCOS state may have occurred, this will contribute to an underestimation of the true magnitude of the relationship, if any. With a case-control design, we cannot exclude the possible effects of other factors that are elevated in the course of critical developmental times, such as childhood or adolescence, as well as elevated androgens that will result in longer AGDs.
In conclusion, PCOS is a hyperandrogenemic state. Both AGDant and AGDpost measurements are longer in PCOS patients than in controls. However, the strongest predictor of PCOS is the ratio of AGDant and AGDpost. AGD Ratioant/post measurement is closely related with FAI and WHR. We suggest that this biomarker can be useful for diagnosing PCOS and can help to improve standardization.