AbstractFollowing a request from the European Commission, the EFSA Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to Food (ANS) was asked to provide a scientific opinion on the safety of the extension of use of the food colour beetroot red (E 162) when added to dietary food for special medical purposes (FSMP) intended for young children aged 1–3 years. Currently, the use of colours in foodstuffs is prohibited in any food for infants and young children, including FSMPs. According to the applicant, the use of food colours is required to ensure appealing and palatable foods for the dietary management of patients whose compliance with the dietary regime (prescribed by healthcare professionals) is a key factor to their health. The Panel considered that there was no higher risk of sensitivity or intolerance to beetroot red extract in the specific population of children with cow's milk allergy or other protein allergies. The exposure scenarios indicated that the total daily protein requirement (up to 3 g protein/kg bw) could be covered by the products containing beetroot red at the proposed use level of 20 mg/L (expressed as the colouring principle betanin) in the final diluted product as consumed without exceeding the amount of betanin likely to be ingested in the same age group from the use of beetroot red (E 162) as a food additive. Exposure in other scenarios based on different assumptions was always below the range of the high level intake of betanin in the same age group. The ANS Panel concluded that the proposed extension of use of beetroot red (E 162) at the proposed level of 20 mg/L in the final diluted FSMP in young children aged 1–3 years would not be of safety concern.

Following a request from the European Commission, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to Food (ANS) provides a scientific opinion regarding the safety of the extension of use of the food additive beetroot red (E 162) when added to dietary food for special medical purposes (FSMP) intended for young children aged 1–3 years.
Currently, the use of colours in foodstuffs is prohibited in any food for infants and young children, including FSMPs.
However, according to the applicant, the use of food colours is required to ensure appealing and palatable foods for the dietary management of patients whose compliance with the dietary regime (prescribed by healthcare professionals) is a key factor to their health. Their diet is based on FSMPs, which either fulfil their daily nutrient requirements or supplement an inadequate dietary intake. The applicant stated that the FSMP‐added beetroot red (E 162) was designed to cover or supplement dietary protein requirement in order to maintain physiological growth and development of the target population.
The safety of beetroot red (E 162) was re‐evaluated by EFSA in 2015. EFSA concluded that the currently available database was inadequate to establish an acceptable daily intake (ADI) for beetroot red as defined by the specifications set for the food additive E 162. However, the colouring principles in E 162 are natural dietary constituents having a long history of food consumption and in addition, the exposure to the main colouring principle betanin resulting from the use of beetroot red (E 162) as food additive is in the same range as the exposure to betanin from the regular diet. Therefore, the Panel concluded that, at the reported use levels, beetroot red (E 162) is not of safety concern as regards its current use as a food additive. In its 2015 opinion, the Panel had estimated exposure to beetroot red (E 162) from its use as a food additive in the age group of toddlers (1–3 years) in the range of 1.4–2.8 mg betanin/kg bw per day for high‐level exposure.
The Panel considered that the available toxicological assessments of beetroot red (E 162) would remain valid and in principle there would be no need to reconsider this to address the Terms of Reference.
With respect to a possible increased risk of allergy and intolerance in the specific population of children with cow's milk allergy or other protein allergies, additional information was sought from the applicant. The outcome of a focused literature search conducted upon request from EFSA provided no indications of significant reports of beetroot allergy or of beetroot intolerance in the general population. The Panel considered that there was no higher risk of sensitivity or intolerance to beetroot red extract for this population and further noted that intolerance and allergy, which are both adverse reactions to food, have different backgrounds, even if they may share symptoms and mediators. Unlike allergy, intolerance is not triggered by an immune mechanism. Therefore, currently there is no rationale for an allergic (atopic) individual to be at higher risk of intolerance.
In consideration of the medical condition of the recipients of the FSMPs, a different dietary pattern compared to their counterparts from the general population should be considered. These specific aspects were taken into account by the Panel when estimating exposure to beetroot red (E 162) by different scenarios. With this aim, the applicant has proposed to assess one exposure scenario with two typical FSMP products containing beetroot red at the proposed level of 20 mg/L in the final diluted product. The exposure scenario proposed was based on the assumption of patients meeting their daily protein need set up by the applicant to 3 g/kg bw per day of protein equivalent, solely from the FSMP coloured with beetroot red (E 162) at the proposed use level. Moreover, in the application, it was reported that FSMP products in liquid or powdered form contain 8–10 g protein equivalent per 100 g or 100 mL of product and that the proposed use level of beetroot red (E 162) in FSMP is 20 mg/L of the final product. On the basis of information provided by the applicant, the Panel calculated that the proposed use level of beetroot red of 20 mg/L would correspond to 0.20–0.25 mg/g protein (expressed as the colouring principle betanin) in the final diluted product. Two exposure scenarios were then calculated by the Panel – the first one based on standard recommendations of 14.5 g/day for protein in children aged 1–3 years, whereas the second scenario would require the patients to meet their daily protein need set up by the applicant to 3 g/kg bw per day of protein equivalent, solely from the FSMP coloured with beetroot red (E 162) at the proposed use level.
According to this last maximum exposure scenario, protein intake can be fully ensured (3 g protein/kg bw) by a FSMP product coloured with beetroot red (E 162) resulting in an approximate maximum intake of beetroot red (E 162) of 0.6–0.8 mg/kg bw per day, i.e. below the amount of betanin likely to be ingested from the use of beetroot red as a food additive (i.e. 1.4–2.8 mg betanin/kg bw per day in toddlers aged 12–35 months). Also, another exposure scenario based on different assumption was below the amount of betanin likely to be ingested from the use of beetroot red (E 162) as a food additive.
The ANS Panel concluded that the proposed extension of use of beetroot red (E 162) at the proposed level of 20 mg/L in the final diluted FSMP in young children aged 1–3 years would not be of safety concern.
The use of food additives is regulated under the European Parliament and Council Regulation (EC) No 1333/20081 on food additives. Only food additives that are included in the Union list, in particular in Annex II to that Regulation, may be placed on the market and used in foods under the conditions of use specified therein.
According to Article 16 of Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008, food additives shall not be used in foods for infants and young children as referred to in Directive 2009/39/EC,2 including dietary foods for infants and young children for special medical purposes, except where specifically provided for in Annex II to that Regulation.
Directive 2009/39/EC will be repealed from 20 July 2016 by Regulation (EU) No 609/20133 of the European Parliament and of the Council on food intended for infants and young children, food for special medical purposes (FSMP) and total diet replacement for weight control.4 This Regulation lays down a new framework for a number of food categories, including FSMP.
Article 2(2)(b) of Regulation (EU) No 609/2013 defines ‘young child’ as ‘a child aged between one and three years’. Article 2(2)(g) of Regulation (EU) No 609/2013 defines ‘food for special medical purposes’ as ‘food specially processed or formulated and intended for the dietary management of patients, including infants, to be used under medical supervision; it is intended for the exclusive or partial feeding of patients with a limited, impaired or disturbed capacity to take, digest, absorb, metabolise or excrete ordinary food or certain nutrients contained therein, or metabolites, or with other medically‐determined nutrient requirements, whose dietary management cannot be achieved by modification of the normal diet alone’.3

The Scientific Committee for Food (SCF) evaluated the use of certain colours in foods for special medical purposes for young children in 1997 (SCF, 1997a). The Committee concluded that mixed carotenes, beetroot red, chlorophylls and anthocyanins are acceptable from the safety point of view for use in FSMP for young children from 12 months of age upwards, up to the maximum levels requested in the diluted product as consumed (mixed carotenes, 30 mg/L; chlorophyll, 20 mg/L; beetroot red, 20 mg/L; and anthocyanins, 20 mg/L). However, the Committee considered that use of colours may be inadvisable in products for children with cow's milk or other protein allergies. As regards carotenes, it was concluded that mixed carotenes derived from natural foods normally consumed are acceptable for use in FSMP, but that until the separate review of β‐carotene is completed, the Committee was unable to give a view on the use of synthetic β‐carotene in FSMP.
The safety of mixed carotenes and β‐carotene was re‐evaluated by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) in 2012 (EFSA ANS Panel, 2012a). EFSA concluded that the use of (synthetic) β‐carotene and mixed β‐carotenes obtained from palm fruit oil, carrots and algae as food colour is not of safety concern, provided the intake from this use as a food additive and as food supplement is not more than the amount likely to be ingested from the regular consumption of the foods in which they occur naturally (5–10 mg/day).
The acceptability of the use of sweeteners in dietary foods for young children for special medical purposes has not been assessed.
The Health and Food Safety Directorate‐General has received a request from Specialised Nutrition Europe (formerly ‘IDACE’) for the extension of use of certain sweeteners and colours in dietary foods for young children for special medical purposes (Food Category 13.1.5.2 of part E of Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008).
The application consists of the request to authorise the use of:
E 950, acesulfame K at 450 mg/kg;E 955, sucralose at 400 mg/kg;E 160a, carotenes at 5 mg/kg;5
E 162 beetroot red, betanin at 20 mg/kg.

According to the applicant, the use of the above‐mentioned additives is required to ensure appealing and palatable foods for the dietary management of patients whose compliance with the dietary regime (prescribed by healthcare professionals) is a key factor to their health.
The use is requested in dietary foods for special medical purposes intended for young children from 12 months onwards who have cow's milk allergy, inborn errors of metabolism or other conditions which require special diets modified to be low in protein, or based on amino acids or protein hydrolysates. Further details as regards the medical conditions are provided in enclosure VIII Medical conditions.
The proposed uses concern special vulnerable groups of consumers. The acceptability of the use of sweeteners in dietary foods for young children for special medical purposes has not been assessed. Therefore it is appropriate to consult EFSA as regards general considerations for the acceptability of the use of the two mentioned sweeteners at the proposed use levels in foods for special medical purposes for young children aged 1–3 years.
The use of colours requested was assessed as acceptable by the SCF. However, the Committee considered that use of colours may be inadvisable in products for children with cow's milk allergy or other protein allergies. Taking into account the intended use proposed by the applicant, it is appropriate to consult EFSA whether the conclusions drawn by the SCF remain valid for the requested use of E 160a carotenes and E 162 beetroot red, betanin.
The European Commission requests EFSA to provide a scientific opinion on the safety of the proposed extension of use for E 950, acesulfame K; E 955, sucralose; E 160a, carotenes; and E 162, beetroot red, betanin in dietary foods for young children for special medical purposes in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1331/2008 establishing a common authorisation procedure for food additives, food enzymes and food flavourings.6

The Panel noted that the current Terms of Reference of the mandate cover four different food additives; however, the Panel decided that each needed to be assessed independently and overall Terms of Reference will be met by four independent opinions.
The Panel noted that, while the Terms of Reference refer to a proposed use level of 20 mg/kg, all the supporting evidence provided by the applicant makes reference to a use level of 20 mg/L in the final diluted product, as consumed. In the absence of information on the dilution factors applied to the products in powdered form, the value of 20 mg/L as provided by the applicant was used in the current opinion.
The safety of beetroot red (E 162) as a food additive was previously considered by this Panel under the re‐evaluation programme for food additives already permitted in the EU before 20 January 2009, as foreseen by the Commission Regulation (EU) No 257/20107 (EFSA ANS Panel, 2015).
In its 2015 opinion the Panel concluded that the currently available toxicological database was inadequate to establish an acceptable daily intake (ADI) for beetroot red as defined by the specifications set for the food additive E 162. However, the colouring principles in E 162 are natural dietary constituents having a long history of food consumption. In addition, the exposure to the main colouring principle betanin resulting from the use of beetroot red (E 162) as food additive is in the same range as the exposure to betanin from the regular diet. Therefore, the Panel concluded that, at the reported use levels, beetroot red (E 162) is not of safety concern as regards its current use as a food additive.
The Panel considered that its previous toxicological assessment would remain valid and in principle there would be no need to reconsider this to address the Terms of Reference of the current mandate.
For the purpose of this opinion the definition of FSMP given in Commission Directive 1999/21/EC of 25 March 19998 on dietary FSMP applies:‘‘dietary foods for special medical purposes’ means a category of foods for particular nutritional uses specially processed or formulated and intended for the dietary management of patients and to be used under medical supervision. They are intended for the exclusive or partial feeding of patients with a limited, impaired or disturbed capacity to take, digest, absorb, metabolise or excrete ordinary foodstuffs or certain nutrients contained therein or metabolites, or with other medically determined nutrient requirements, whose dietary management cannot be achieved only by modification of the normal diet, by other foods for particular nutritional uses or by a combination of the two.’

The Panel also noted that a new Regulation referring to FSMP and food for infants and young children including children with less than 12 months is available (Regulation (EU) No 609/2013) and that it will be entering into force from 20 July 2016. The following definition is given in the new regulation:‘‘food for special medical purposes’ means food specially processed or formulated and intended for the dietary management of patients, including infants, to be used under medical supervision; it is intended for the exclusive or partial feeding of patients with a limited, impaired or disturbed capacity to take, digest, absorb, metabolise or excrete ordinary food or certain nutrients contained therein, or metabolites, or with other medically determined nutrient requirements, whose dietary management cannot be achieved by modification of the normal diet alone.’

The applicant has provided information for beetroot red (E 162) on existing uses, authorisations and evaluations in the European Union and other international organisations.
As already stated, beetroot red (E 162) was recently re‐evaluated for its use as a food additive by this Panel, also taking into account previous evaluations and authorisations (EFSA ANS Panel, 2015).
Beetroot red (E 162) is included in Group II, Food colours authorised at quantum satis (QS) and as such they are authorised for use as colours in all foodstuffs at QS.
Group II food colours are authorised for use in food category 13.2 (Dietary foods for special medical purposes defined in Directive 1999/21/EC) with the exception of products falling into category 13.1.5, i.e. Dietary foods for infants and young children for special medical purposes as defined by Directive 1999/21/EC and special formulae for infants.
The acceptability of the use of carotenes (E 160a), beetroot red (E 162), chlorophylls (E 140) and anthocyanins in FSMPs for young children aged 1–3 was evaluated by the SCF (SCF, 1997a) which specifically considered whether there was any likelihood that young children with particular medical conditions might react to these colours differently from normal children and adults. At the time the SCF concluded that despite the limited biological information, it was not anticipated that conditions such as inborn errors of metabolism, intestinal, liver or kidney disease, or general feeding difficulties, would predispose to problems with the use of any of these four colours. The SCF however considered that in the case of allergy there might be a predisposition to intolerance to colours and therefore considered inadvisable the use of colours in products for children with cow's milk or other protein allergies.
At the time of the preparation of the initial dossier, Beet red was listed in Australia and New Zealand in the Food Standards Code (FSANZ, online), Schedule 3 as a permitted colouring in processed foods in Schedule 1. There were no restrictions limiting the use of colours in FSMPs for children aged over 1 year in 13.3 Foods for Special Dietary Uses as listed in Schedule 1.
The applicant has submitted a dossier in support of its application for the extension of the approved uses of beetroot red (E 162) in FSMP for young children (Documentation provided to EFSA n.1).
Additional data were generated by the applicant upon request from EFSA (Documentation provided to EFSA n.2).
The assessment was conducted in line with the principles described in the EFSA Guidance on transparency in the scientific aspects of risk assessment (EFSA, 2009) and following the relevant existing Guidances from the EFSA Scientific Committee.
The current ‘Guidance for submission for food additive evaluations’ (EFSA ANS Panel, 2012b) has been followed by the ANS Panel for this evaluation of the proposed extension of use of the already authorised food additive beetroot red (E 162).
The approach for the exposure assessment described in the guidance using the FAIM (Food Additives Intake Model) tool (EFSA ANS Panel, 2012b) could not be applied by the Panel in the evaluation for use of beetroot red (E 162) in FSMP for children aged 1–3 years. This is because due to their medical condition, the recipients of the FSMPs have different dietary consumption patterns compared to their counterparts from the general population. Their diet is based on FSMPs that either fulfil their daily nutrient requirements or supplement an inadequate dietary intake. According to the applicant, beetroot red (E 162) is intended to be added to increase the appeal and palatability of FSMPs. One daily protein intake scenario proposed by the applicant for FSMP usage with two different products was used to estimate the exposure to beetroot red (E 162) in this population (see Section 3.3). In addition, the Panel estimated exposure to beetroot red (E 162) in FSMPs based on the information contained in the dossier regarding the typical protein content (8–10 g) in 100 mL or mg of FSMP and the proposed use level.
An additional scenario for exposure was calculated by the Panel using dietary reference values (DRVs) for protein set by the EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA) in 2012 (EFSA NDA Panel, 2012).
The applicant claimed that the food additive beetroot red (E 162) to be used for the proposed extension of use complies with the current specifications laid down in Commission Regulation (EU) No 231/20129.
According to the applicant, beetroot red (E 162) is to be used in FSMP for children (1–3 years of age) to improve the appeal and palatability of the products and aid compliance with the dietary regimen prescribed at a proposed use level of 20 mg/L in the final diluted product.
The Panel noted that in its 1997 opinion by the SCF, children suffering from allergy to cow's milk or other whole proteins were specifically excluded from the authorised uses of natural colours in foods for special medical purposes. In their conclusions, the SCF explained that these conclusions were based on the hypothesis that ‘this sensitive population may be at higher risk of intolerance’ to other dietary constituents in general and specifically to beetroot red and to extracts of beta carotene (SCF, 1997a). These conclusions were apparently based on an earlier report (SCF, 1997b).
The Panel noted that the composition of beetroot red (E 162), according to the current EU specifications, allows for considerable amounts of carbohydrates (42–56%) and proteins (5–8%).
Upon request from EFSA, the applicant has submitted results from a literature review of the available evidence to address whether children suffering from allergy to cow's milk or other whole proteins would be at higher risk of allergy and/or intolerance (Documentation provided to EFSA n.2). The applicant concluded that this literature review did not identify any reports of intolerance or allergy to beetroot in children suffering from confirmed allergy to cow's milk or other whole proteins (e.g. wheat, egg, nuts and peanuts).
On the basis of evidence available, the Panel considered that there were no indications of significant reports of beetroot allergy or of beetroot intolerance in the general population. Given the Panel's observations on the SCF conclusions on allergy and intolerance from 1995, the Panel considered that there was no higher risk of sensitivity or intolerance to beetroot red extract for this population. Therefore, the risk assessment can be based on the recent re‐evaluation of beetroot red as a food colour (EFSA ANS Panel, 2015).
The Panel further noted that intolerance and allergy, which are both adverse reactions to food, have different backgrounds, even if they may share symptoms and mediators. Unlike allergy, intolerance is not triggered by an immune mechanism. Therefore, currently there is no rationale for an allergic (atopic) individual to be at higher risk of intolerance.
According to the applicant, in patients with food allergy and inborn errors of metabolism, the primary medical consideration in terms of dietary management is the modification of the diet to reduce or eliminate certain macronutrients (e.g. protein).
The applicant presented two scenarios for the use of beetroot red (E 162) in FSMP for children, both based on the assumption that patients would meet their daily protein need, set up by the applicant to 3 g/kg bw per day, solely from FSMP products coloured with beetroot red (E 162). Two examples of specific products were provided in the dossier within a single scenario requiring patients to meet their daily protein need set up by the applicant to 3 g/kg bw per day solely from FSMP products coloured with beetroot red (E 162). According to these scenarios, the concentration of beetroot red (E 162) in the final diluted product would be in the range 0.01–0.03 mg/g protein.
However, because in the application it was reported that FSMP products in liquid or powdered form contain 8–10 g of protein equivalent per 100 g or 100 mL of product, at the proposed use level of beetroot red (E 162) in FSMP of 20 mg/L of final diluted product, the concentration of beetroot red (E 162), expressed as the colouring principle betanin, would be equal to 0.20–0.25 mg/g protein.
Exposures to beetroot red (E 162) according to a scenario close to the original standard recommendations of 14.5 g/day of protein in children aged 1–3 years (UK Department of Health, 1991), and to the second scenario set up by the applicant (i.e. patients meeting their daily protein need of 3 g protein/kg bw per day) solely from FSMP products coloured with beetroot red (E 162) at the proposed use level, are reported in Table 1.
The exposure estimates obtained from the proposed use in FSMP were compared to the high level (95th percentile) daily intake of betanin (expressed in mg/kg bw per day) estimated from a refined exposure scenario (brand‐loyal) from the use of beetroot red (E 162) as a food additive in the same age group (toddlers, from 12 months up to and including 35 months of age) as calculated by the Panel for the 2015 re‐evaluation opinion (EFSA ANS Panel, 2015). This comparison was based on the assumption that the proposed use levels of 20 mg/L in the final diluted product are expressed as the colouring principle betanin.
The daily intake of beetroot red (E 162) expressed in mg/kg bw is therefore ranging from 0.6 to 0.8 for the proposed protein intake scenario of 3 g protein/kg bw, below the daily dietary intake estimated in the same age group from its use as a food additive (i.e. 1.4–2.8 mg betanin/kg bw per day in toddlers aged 12–35 months).
In addition, the Panel performed a calculation of exposure assessment to beetroot red (E 162) based on a scenario in which FSMP‐added beetroot red (E 162) was to cover daily protein intake at the level of protein DRV set by EFSA (EFSA NDA Panel, 2012).
Accordingly, the Panel applied values for the protein intake ranging from 0.95 to 0.73 g protein/kg bw per day for children aged between 1 and 3 years and weighing from 10.2 to 14.7 kg, respectively. This scenario is reported in Table 2.
For this last scenario, the daily exposure to beetroot red (E 162) resulting from the exclusive use of FSMP at the proposed use levels was in the range of 0.15–0.24 mg/kg bw per day.
The Panel noted that the exposure estimates were below the total amount of beetroot red (E 162) (expressed as the colouring principle betanin) likely to be ingested from foods in which beetroot red is used as a food additive in the same age group of the population, in the proposed scenarios when FSMPs containing beetroot red (E 162) at the proposed use levels were used to either cover or supplement total daily requirement for protein in children aged 1–3 years.
As stated in the interpretation of the Terms of Reference, in order to address the safety of the proposed extension of use of beetroot red (E 162) in FSMP for children aged 1–3 years, the Panel evaluated the exposure estimated from the proposed use in FSMP, as provided by the applicant, with the daily dietary intake estimated in the same age group from its use as a food additive.
The Panel further noted that intolerance and allergy, which are both adverse reactions to food, have different backgrounds, even if they may share symptoms and mediators. Unlike allergy, intolerance is not triggered by an immune mechanism. Therefore, currently there is no rationale for an allergic (atopic) individual to be at higher risk of intolerance.
The estimated exposures from the use of beetroot red (E 162) in FSMPs at the level amounting to 20 mg/L in the final diluted product (expressed as the colouring principle betanin) would not lead to an intake above the amount likely to be ingested from regular diet in which beetroot red is naturally present in food in the same age group of the population in either the scenario provided by the applicant or the one estimated by the Panel.
The ANS Panel concluded that the proposed extension of use of beetroot red (E 162) at the requested level of 20 mg/L in the final diluted FSMP in young children aged 1–3 years would not be of safety concern.

Application for new use of a permitted additive. March 2010. Submitted by IDACE (Association of the Food Industries for Particular Nutritional use of the European Union) and its update of August 2012.Applicant response to EFSA request for additional information, September 2015.


ADIacceptable daily intakeANS PanelScientific Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to Foodbwbody weightDRVdietary reference valueECEuropean CommissionFAIMFood Additives Intake ModelFAOFood and Agriculture Organization of the United NationsFDAFood and Drug AdministrationFSMPfood for special medical purposesJECFAJoint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food AdditivesNDAEFSA Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and AllergiesQS
quantum satis
SCFScientific Committee for FoodWHOWorld Health Organization
