The increased demand of clinical data for the conduct of clinical and translational research incentivized repurposing of the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences’ enterprise data warehouse (EDW) to meet researchers’ data needs. The EDW was renamed the Arkansas Clinical Data Repository (AR-CDR), underwent content enhancements, and deployed a self-service cohort estimation tool in late of 2016. In an effort to increase adoption of the AR-CDR, a team of physician informaticist and information technology professionals conducted various informational sessions across the UAMS campus to increase awareness of the AR-CDR and the informatics capabilities. The restructuring of the data warehouse resulted in four-fold utilization increase of the AR-CDR data services in 2017. To assess acceptance rates of the AR-CDR and quantify outcomes of services provided, Everett Rogers’ diffusion of innovation (DOI) framework was applied, and a survey was distributed. Results show the factors that had impact on increased adoption were: presence of physician informaticist to mediate interactions between researchers and analysts, data quality, communication with and engagement of researchers, and the AR-CDR’s team responsiveness and customer service mindset.

Clinical enterprise data warehouses (EDW) emerged to fulfil organizational data needs with the aim to integrate and improve quality of data. The enormous amounts of data captured through electronic medical records (EMR) motivated the adoption of EDWs as means to discover new knowledge that could improve patient care. Some organizations use EDWs to actively improve the care of specific patients as soon as they are hospitalized [1]. Many healthcare organizations are already reaping the benefits of a data warehouse and recognizing its value in support of research [2].
The University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (UAMS) decision to develop an in-house data warehouse was necessitated by the diversity of silo clinical and administrative data sources, and the need to support the increased demand for clinical and transitional research. Implemented in 2011, the data warehouse at UAMS had less than favorable acceptance, and UAMS’ leadership decision to move the EDW’s home to the department of biomedical informatics in 2016 to address the growing data needs of researchers led to improved utilization. The decision to rebrand the EDW to the Arkansas Clinical Data Repository (AR-CDR) is an indication of UAMS commitment to maintain a competitive advantage in the healthcare space by leveraging its rich data sources to drive innovative clinical research. With the AR-CDR, researchers no longer need to collate data from disparate systems to answer their research questions.
The paper characterizes the factors that contributed to increased adoption of the AR-CDR, and can be categorized as: (1) Technical: incorporating more subject areas into the AR-CDR improved data quality and efficiency of query fulfilment, (2) Behavioral: empowering researchers with use of self-service cohort estimation tools, and (3) Organizational: assembling a team, including a physician informaticist, with focus on customer service improved relationship and trust with researchers.
The laborious task of linking data from UAMS’ clinical, ancillary, and administrative systems motivated the implementation of the first EDW in 2011, with the arching goal of streamlining the process of reporting. The deployment of the EDW followed three phases: (1) Integration of clinical and financial systems, (2) Integration of the Epic electronic medical record (EMR), and (3) Repurposing of the EDW to support Clinical and Translational Research.
In support of the clinical and translational science award (CTSA), data warehouses emerged as a necessity to facilitate medical research for either efficient recruitment of research participants or secondary use of clinical data to discover new knowledge. In response, UAMS’ data warehouse included a subset of clinical subject areas that were sufficient to answer operational questions. It included patients’ information and demographics, diagnoses, charges, laboratory and medication data. The ETL (extract, transform, and load) process extracted data from four clinical systems: Centricity, SunRise and AllScripts, SoftLab, and GE EMR; and two financial systems: MeKesson and Siemens.
Shortly after deploying the data warehouse, UAMS launched I2B2 (Informatics for Integrating Biology & the Bedside) for research cohort estimation. I2B2 is a self-service tool that provides a de-identified subset of EMR’s clinical attributes such as patient diagnoses, medications, and laboratory results and aims at accelerating research studies initiation.
The adoption of Epic EMR in 2014 replaced legacy clinical systems and became the mainstay system for charting ambulatory and inpatient encounters. The data warehouse ETL was redirected to extract data from EPIC Clarity data repository without enhancing the EDW with new clinical subjects. By 2016, data incompleteness of the EDW resulted in decreased utilization due to repeated data quality discrepancies.
In 2016, the EDW was renamed the Arkansas Data Repository (AR-CDR) to reflect UAMS’ new direction to provide a comprehensive research data platform that ties clinical and disease registries. The AR-CDR’s new home, the department of biomedical informatics, leverages the department’s faculty rich mix of expertise in clinical and informatics domains. In addition, a dedicated support team, made up of analysts and developers, was assembled and is led by a physician informaticist. With the newly assembled team, a series of face-to-face interviews were conducted with researchers to assess their data needs and understand their experience with the retired EDW. Overall, researchers expressed, in descending order, their dissatisfaction with quality of data, technical staff unfamiliarity with clinical terminology, inadequacy and non-intuitiveness of the I2B2 tool, and insufficient communications and with the technical team.
In response to researchers’ feedback, we held several individual meetings with researchers and presented at several clinical departments meetings to introduce the AR-CDR’s enhancements and informatics tools, including: (1) addition of surgery and anesthesia, health literacy, social history, oncology, and obstetrics and gynecology subject areas; (2) Integration of tumor and trauma registries, and tissue bio-specimen; and (3) Deployment of TriNetX2, a web-based, self-service cohort estimation tool. In addition, a simple, streamlined research data request fulfilment process was implemented, and installed RedMine3, a web-based open source project management tool, to track and document research data requests, user and group communications, and technical and content enhancements.
In order to assess researchers’ acceptance of the AR-CDR, we applied Everett Rogers’ [3] stages of diffusion of innovation (DOI) framework to evaluate the stages researchers’ passed through to access and use the system. Rogers’ framework estimates adaptors of new technology can be categorized as innovators (2.5%), early adopters (13.5%), early majority (34%), late majority (34%) and laggards (16%) [3].
In order to evaluate researchers’ impressions of the AR-CDR, in comparison with the retired EDW, we implemented and distributed a 14-question survey to assess: 1) quality of service, 2) workflow efficiency, 3) usefulness of data, 4) publication and grant submissions, and 5) user satisfaction.
The positive transformation of the AR-CDR was achieved by conducting campus-wide campaign to showcase the system’s capabilities and to demonstrate the cohort estimation tool functionality. Between January 01 and December 31, 2017, the AR-CDR and the cohort estimation tool were presented to 156 people: 110 individual researchers, 10 small group presentations, and 3 faculty department meetings. Adoption rates of the AR-CDR were higher than Roger’s framework across all categories except for late majority and laggards: innovators (7%), early adopters (22%), early majority (38%), late majority (30%) and laggards (3%), Figure 1.
The number of IRB-approved research queries received in 2017 was four times (99 queries) of what was received on average (25 queries) in each 2015 and 2016, and 37 researchers executed 455 cohort estimation queries. Out of the 60 researchers surveyed and received data from the AR-CDR in 2017, two researchers were no longer at UAMS; and, 32 of 58 completed the survey for a response rate of (55%). Survey respondents were classified into two groups based on their date of awareness of either the EDW or AR-CDR: Group 1: January 2017 to December 2017, (n = 27), included respondents who became aware of the AR-CDR for the first time; and, Group 2: Before January 2017, (n=5), included respondents who knew of the EDW before it transitioned to the AR-CDR.
Both groups highly rated the AR-CDR quality of service, Figure 2. Group 2 satisfaction edged higher than group 1 in spite of their disappointment with the retired EDW. Both groups reported that data provided to research queries were of high quality and had high concordance with clinical systems, and their research queries were completed within reasonable time. While group 1 submitted most number of research queries: 57% submitted one research query and 43% submitted at least two research queries, group 2 researchers submitted at least four research queries each. Outcome of queries showed that 100% of group 2, compared to 60% of group1, submitted for either grant or publication, and 40% of group 1 used data for hypothesis generation.
Of the 156 users who knew of the AR-CDR, 105 received access to the cohort estimation tool, 37 executed at least one query, and 60 submitted at least one IRB-approved query, totaling 99 research queries. We believe the factors that contributed to increased throughput of the AR-CDR in 2017 were organizational- placing the AR-CDR in the department of biomedical informatics and leveraging clinical and informatics expertise were key in establishing trust and collaboration with researchers; behavioral - establishing rapport through frequent meetings and communications, and setting realistic expectation with researchers were necessary to build professional relationships; and technical - deploying new self-service tools and enhancing the AR-CDR content empower researchers to use for clinical and analytical studies. Continued demand and use of the AR-CDR depends on the provisioning of quality data and informatics tools.