AbstractThis report of EFSA presents the results of surveillance activities on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) in bovine animals, sheep and goats as well as genotyping data in sheep, carried out in 2015 in the EU and in three non‐Member States (non‐MS). Since 2001, approximately 114 million cattle in the EU have been tested for bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) according Regulation (EC) 999/2001. In 2015, 1.4 million bovine animals were tested and five cases were detected in four MS (Ireland: one case; Slovenia: one case; Spain: one case; and the United Kingdom: two cases) and one case was detected in Norway. Two cases (in Ireland and the United Kingdom) were affected by classical BSE and both cases were born after the EU‐wide feed ban enforced in 2001. The remaining four cases were atypical BSE cases (three H‐BSE type and one L‐BSE type). Since 2002, approximately 8.4 million small ruminants have been tested during the EU‐wide surveillance for scrapie. In 2015, 319,638 sheep and 135,857 goats were tested. In total, 641 scrapie cases in sheep were detected in 18 MS while 1,052 scrapie cases in goats were detected in nine MS, respectively. In two non‐MS (Iceland and Norway), 40 scrapie cases in sheep were detected. Although in a number of MS the decrease in classical scrapie is clear, at the EU level there is no clear decreasing trend in the occurrence of scrapie in small ruminants. Results obtained from genotyping in sheep confirm that cases of classical scrapie are clustered among certain genotypes, and animals with these genotypes seem to account for less than 20% of the European randomly sampled sheep population. In total, 580 samples from species other than domestic ruminants were tested for TSE in three MS, all with negative results.

This report of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) presents the detailed results of monitoring activities on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) in bovine animals, sheep and goats carried out during 2015 in the European Union (EU) and three non‐Member States (non‐MS) as well as a summary and trends of the monitoring between 2001 and 2015.
TSE monitoring data for bovine animals and small ruminants are reported by countries according to Regulation (EC) 999/2001 and consist of testing data (monthly reported) as well as case data (positive tested and/or confirmed positive animals). Data regarding the genotyping activities carried out on the ovine TSE cases, as well as on randomly selected sheep, were retrieved from the annual reports submitted by the Member States (MS) and non‐MS in accordance with Article 6.4 of, and as specified in Chapter B.I of Annex III to, Regulation (EC) 999/2001, i.e. the TSE Regulation.
Descriptive statistics were used to analyse the data. Where possible, descriptions and calculations were stratified according to the available variables in the database, such as surveillance target group (healthy slaughtered animals, animals culled under bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)/TSE control and eradication measures, etc.) or activity (passive vs active surveillance), country, year (since 2001 and 2002, respectively, for bovine animals and small ruminants), case type (i.e. classical BSE (C‐BSE), atypical BSE (H‐BSE or L‐BSE), classical scrapie (CS) or atypical scrapie (AS)), flock status (infected/non‐infected) and age class.
Since 2001, approximately 114 million bovine animals have been tested for BSE in the EU. There has been a decrease in the number of animals tested over time following amendments in the Regulation (EC) 999/2001. In 2015, around 1.4 million animals were tested in the EU. The number of positive BSE cases has also decreased over time, both in terms of absolute number of cases as well as the proportion of cases in tested animals. In 2015, only five BSE cases were detected in the EU, all among tested fallen stock from four different MS (Ireland, Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom). Two cases were C‐BSE, both of them born after the EU‐wide feed ban was enforced in 2001 (BARB cases). The remaining three cases in the EU were of atypical type (two H‐BSE and one L‐BSE, respectively). In addition, one case of H‐BSE was detected in one non‐MS (Norway).
A clear decline in the annual rate of cases per million tests performed was observed for the whole period of BSE monitoring in the EU (2001–2015). An increase in the age of the affected animals is observed and there is an accumulation of cases in animals born in the mid‐1990s.
Since 2002, approximately 8.4 million small ruminants have been tested for scrapie in the EU. In 2015, approximately 300,000 sheep and 135,000 goats were tested. In 2015, 641 scrapie cases in sheep and 1,052 scrapie cases in goats were detected in the EU. The scrapie cases in sheep were detected in 18 MS, whereas caprine cases (± 90% reported by Cyprus) were detected in nine MS. In addition, 40 cases in sheep were detected in two out of the three reporting non‐MS. There is no clear trend of improvement in the epidemiological situation of small ruminant TSEs overall in the countries included in the report, either in terms of the absolute number of cases or cases in tested animals. However, in some MS there is a decline of CS. The genotyping data confirm that CS in sheep is clustered among genetically susceptible animal while these animals account for less than 20% of the random sampled sheep.
In addition, 580 samples from species other than domestic animals were tested in three MS (Estonia, Finland and Hungary) in 2015 by, all with negative results.
According to Part I.A, Chapter B.I Annex III of Regulation (EC) 999/20011 (hereinafter referred to as the transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) Regulation), the information to be presented by the Member States (MS) in their annual report, as provided for in Article 6(4), includes: The number of suspected cases placed under official movement restrictions in accordance with Article 12(1), per animal species.The number of suspected cases subject to laboratory examination in accordance with Article 12(2), per animal species, including the results of the rapid and confirmatory tests (number of positives and negatives) and, with regard to bovine animals, the age distribution of all tested animals. The age distribution should be grouped as follows: ‘below 24 months’, distribution per 12 months between 24 and 155 months, and ‘above 155 months’ of age.The number of flocks where suspected cases in ovine and caprine animals have been reported and investigated pursuant to Article 12(1) and (2).The number of bovine animals tested within each subpopulation referred to in Chapter A, Part I, points 2.1, 2.2, 3.1 and 5. The method of the sample selection, the results of the rapid and confirmatory tests and the age distribution of the tested animals grouped as set out in point 2 shall be provided.The number of ovine and caprine animals and flocks tested within each subpopulation referred to in Chapter A, Part II, points 2, 3, 5 and 6 together with the method for sample selection and the results of the rapid and confirmatory tests.The geographical distribution, including the country of origin if not the same as the reporting country, of positive cases of BSE and scrapie. The year, and where possible the month of birth shall be given for each TSE case in bovine, ovine and caprine animals. TSE cases which have been considered atypical shall be indicated.For scrapie cases, the results of the primary and secondary molecular testing, referred to in Annex X, Chapter C, point 3.2(c), shall be reported, where appropriate.In animals other than bovine, ovine and caprine animals, the number of samples and confirmed TSE cases per species.The genotype, and, where possible, the breed, of each ovine animal either found positive to TSE and sampled in accordance with Chapter A, Part II, point 8.1, or sampled in accordance with Chapter A, Part II, point 8.2.
According to Chapter B.II, ‘the compilation of reports containing the information referred to in B.I and submitted to the Commission (which shall send it to the European Food Safety Authority) on a monthly basis in the electronic format agreed between the MS, the Commission and the European Food Safety Authority or, with regard to the information referred to in point 8 on a quarterly basis, may constitute the annual report as required by Article 6(4), provided that the information is updated whenever additional information becomes available’.
The Union summary shall be presented in a tabled format covering at least the information referred to in Part I.A Chapter B.I for each MS.
From 1 January 2016, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) shall analyse the information referred to in Part I Chapter B.I and publish by the end of November a summary report on the trends and sources of TSEs in the European Union (EU).
Animals suspected of a TSE should be examined in accordance with Article 12.2 of the TSE Regulation. The legal framework for the active monitoring of ruminants for the presence of TSE is laid down in Article 6 of the TSE Regulation, and specified in its Annex III Chapter A.
Out of the 27 MS at that time, Commission Decision 2009/719/EC,2 allowed 25 MS (all except Bulgaria, Romania) to apply a revised bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) monitoring programme. Commission Implementing Decision 2013/76/EU3 of 4 February 2013, amending Commission Decision 2009/719/EC, authorised these 25 MS to decide to stop testing healthy slaughtered bovine animals.
The legal basis for the sample collection and for the test methods is laid down in Chapter C of Annex X of the TSE Regulation. From 2005, Annex X (as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 36/20054) also provides for mandatory discriminatory testing for BSE of TSE cases detected in small ruminants.
The legal basis for the testing for the determination of the prion protein genotypes (genotype testing) is laid down in points 8.1 and 8.2 of Chapter A in Annex III of TSE Regulation.
The BSE surveillance of bovine animals is based on the testing of samples from the following target groups: Animals clinically suspected of being infected by BSE (SU): Live, slaughtered or dead animals that show or have shown neurological or behavioural disorders or a progressive deterioration of the general condition linked to impairment of the central nervous system and for which the information gathered on the basis of a clinical examination, response to treatment, a post‐mortem examination or ante‐ or post‐mortem laboratory analysis do not allow an alternative diagnosis to be established. BSE shall be suspected in bovine animals, which have produced a positive result from a rapid test specifically for BSE as defined in Article 3 1(h) of the TSE Regulation and subject to the measures described in Articles 12 and 13. Animals culled under BSE eradication measures (EM): Birth cohorts (bovine animals born in the same herd as the affected bovine animal, and within 12 months preceding or following the date of birth of the affected bovine animal), rearing cohorts (bovine animals which at any time during the first year of their lives were reared together with the affected bovine animal during the first year of its life) (point 2 Annex I) and, where the disease was confirmed in a female animal, its progeny born within a period of 2 years prior to, or after, the clinical onset of the disease (point 1(a) Chapter B Annex VII). Animals with clinical signs at ante mortem (AM): Bovine animals with (abnormal) observations at ante mortem inspections (Article 6 1a(a)). Emergency slaughtered (ES): Bovine animals sent for emergency slaughter (Article 6 1a(a)). Fallen stock (FS): Bovine animals not slaughtered for human consumption that have died or been killed on the farm, during transport or in an abattoir (Article 6 1a(c)) (the MS may decide to derogate from this provision in remote areas with low animal density, where no collection of dead animals is organised). The derogation shall not cover more than 10% of the bovine population in the MS. Healthy slaughtered (HS): Bovine animals slaughtered for human consumption (Article 6 1a(b)).
The categories of bovine animals to be submitted to BSE testing are defined in the TSE Regulation and are based on a combination of age (limits) and surveillance target groups. The general rules for BSE surveillance, applied in 2015, are summarised in Table 1. The age limits, to be applied for certain surveillance target groups, have been changed over time and the main changes are summarised in Table 2. There are some differences in the application of these general rules due to specific national rules, these national rules, as applied in 2015, are shown in Table 3.
All samples intended to be examined for the presence of a TSEs in general shall be collected using the methods and protocols laid down in the latest edition of the Manual for diagnostic tests and vaccines for Terrestrial Animals of the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE).
Samples from bovine animals sent for laboratory testing pursuant to the provisions of Annex III, Chapter A, Part I shall be examined by a rapid test. When the result of the rapid test is inconclusive or positive, the sample shall immediately be subjected to confirmatory examinations using at least one of the following methods and protocols laid down in the latest edition of the Manual (Figure 1).
Samples from bovine animals collected from suspect cases should immediately be subjected to confirmatory examinations using at least one of the following methods: immunohistochemistry (IHC), western blot (WB), demonstration of characteristic scrapie‐associated fibrils (SAF) by electron microscopy, or histopathological examination and a combination of rapid tests. Rapid tests may be used for both primary screening and, if inconclusive or positive, subsequent confirmation according to the guidelines from the TSE European Union Reference Laboratory (EURL).
According to point 3.1(b) Chapter C Annex X, where the result of the primary screening is not confirmed by the subsequent rapid test, the sample must be subjected to an examination using one of the other confirmatory methods. Where histopathological examination is used for that purpose, but proves to be inconclusive or negative, the tissues must be submitted to further examination using one of the other confirmatory methods and protocols.
Samples from all positive BSE cases should be forwarded to a laboratory for discriminatory testing of confirmed BSE cases, for the classification of bovine TSE isolates, according to point 3.1(a)(c) Chapter C Annex X of the TSE Regulation, as amended by Commission regulation 630/20135.
The surveillance of ovine and caprine animals for the presence of TSE is performed based on testing samples obtained from the following surveillance target groups: Animals clinically suspected of being infected by a TSE (SU): Ovine and caprine live, slaughtered or dead animals that show or have shown neurological or behavioural disorders or a progressive deterioration of the general condition linked to impairment of the central nervous system and for which the information gathered on the basis of a clinical examination, response to treatment, a post‐mortem examination or an ante‐ or post‐mortem laboratory analysis do not allow an alternative diagnosis to be established (Article 3 1(h)of the TSE Regulation), and subject to the measures described in Articles 12 and 13 of the TSE Regulation. Animals culled under TSE eradication measures (EM): In the case of a TSE‐infected flock or herd where BSE cannot be excluded, all animals, embryos and ova identified by the inquiry shall be killed completely destroyed, without delay. When BSE and atypical scrapie (AS) can be excluded, and option 1 (killing and complete destruction or slaughtered for human consumption of all animals) has been applied, animals over 18 months of age that are killed for destruction shall be tested for the presence of TSE based on the selection of a simple random sample, in accordance with the sample size set in Annex III Chapter A, Section II Point 5. If derogations for killing and destruction are applied, all animals which are over 18 months of age slaughtered for human consumption shall be tested. When option 2 is applied (killing and complete destruction or slaughtered for human consumption of the susceptible animals only), after the genotyping of all ovine animals, a simple random sample of the animals over 18 months of age selected for killing and destruction shall be tested for the presence of TSE in accordance with the sample size set in Annex III Chapter A, Section II Point 5. If derogations for killing and destruction are applied, all animals which are over 18 months of age slaughtered for human consumption shall be tested. Animals not slaughtered for human consumption (NSHC): Ovine and caprine animals that have died or been killed, but which were not killed in the framework of a disease eradication campaign, or slaughtered for human consumption. Minimum sample sizes are set to take into account the size of the ovine populations in the individual MS and are intended to provide achievable targets (see Table 4). 1— In the case of an infected flock or herd where either option 1, 2, 3 or derogations (point 2.2.2 b ii and iii) have been applied, and during the intensified TSE testing programme for a period of 2 years or from the date of the detection of the last scrapie case, all animals (except ARR ovine animals) over the age of 18 months which have died or been killed on the holding but which were not killed in the framework of a disease eradication campaign must be tested for the presence of TSE. Healthy animals slaughtered for human consumption (SHC): The MS in which the population of ewes and ewe lambs put to the ram, in the case of sheep, or the population of goats that have already kidded and goats mated exceeds 750,000 animals shall test a minimum annual sample of 10,000 ovine and/or caprine animals slaughtered for human consumption (point 2(a) Section II Chapter A Annex III of the TSE Regulation) (see Table 4). The MS may choose to replace a maximum of 50% of its minimum sample size of ovine and caprine animals slaughtered for human consumption by testing dead ovine or caprine animals over the age of 18 months and a maximum of 10% of its minimum sample size of SHC and NSHC by testing ovine or caprine animals killed in the framework of a disease eradication campaign over the age of 18 months at the ratio of one to one. 1— In the case of an infected flock or herd where option 2 or derogations (point 2.2.2 b ii and iii) has been applied, and during the intensified TSE testing programme for a period of 2 years or from the date of the detection of the last scrapie case, animals which were kept in the holding at the time when the TSE case was confirmed, and which have been slaughtered for human consumption shall be tested for TSE.2— In the case of an infected flock where option 3 (no mandatory killing and complete destruction of animals) or derogations (point 2.2.2 b ii and iii) have been applied, all of the animals which are over the age of 18 months (except ARR/ARR animals) which have been slaughtered for human consumption shall be tested for the presence of TSE.
Where the TSE case confirmed in a holding is an AS case, the holding shall be subject to the following intensified TSE surveillance protocol for a period of 2 years from the date of the detection of the last AS case: all ovine and caprine animals which are over the age of 18 months and slaughtered for human consumption and all ovine and caprine animals over the age of 18 months which have died or been killed on the holding shall be tested for the presence of TSE.
This classification of surveillance target groups has been used to outline the data in this report and to summarise historical data.
Samples from ovine and caprine animals sent for laboratory testing pursuant to the provisions of Annex III, Chapter A, Part II (Monitoring in ovine and caprine animals) shall be examined by a rapid test, in order to ensure the detection of all known strains of TSE. When the result of the rapid test is inconclusive or positive, the sampled tissues shall immediately be sent to an official laboratory for confirmatory examinations by histopathology, IHC, WB, characterisation of SAF by electron microscopy, as referred to in point (a). If the result of the confirmatory examination is negative or inconclusive, the tissues shall be submitted to a further examination by IHC or WB. If the result of one of the confirmatory examinations is positive, the animal shall be regarded as a positive TSE case and further examination as referred to in point (c) shall be performed (Figure 2).
Samples from ovine or caprine animals collected from suspect cases should immediately be subjected to confirmatory examinations using at least one of the following methods: IHC, WB, SAF or histopathological examination. Samples from routine monitoring should be examined using a rapid test, to ensure the detection of all known strains of TSE.
According to point 3.2(b) Chapter C Annex X, when the result of the rapid test is inconclusive or positive, the sampled tissues should be immediately sent to an official laboratory for confirmatory examinations by histopathology, IHC, WB or SAF. If the result of the confirmatory examination is negative or inconclusive, the tissues should be submitted to further examination by IHC or WB.
Samples from clinical suspect cases and from tested animals regarded as positive TSE cases, but which are not AS cases, or which display characteristics that are deemed by the testing laboratory to merit investigation, should be examined using a discriminatory WB method listed in the guidelines of the TSE EURL by an official diagnostic laboratory designated by the competent authority (point 3.2(c) Chapter C Annex X). TSE cases in which the presence of BSE cannot be excluded by the primary molecular testing referred should be submitted to further investigation and confirmation using at least one alternative method, differing immunochemically from the original primary molecular method.
The prion protein genotype for codons 136, 154 and 171 should be determined for all TSE‐positive ovine animals. In addition, a minimum sample of ovine animals should be determined. In the case of MS with an adult sheep population of > 750,000 animals, this minimum sample should be at least 600 animals. In the case of other MS, the minimum sample should be at least 100 animals. The samples may be chosen from animals slaughtered for human consumption, from dead‐on‐farm animals or from live animals. The sampling should be representative of the entire ovine population (points 8.1 and 8.2 Section II Chapter A Annex III).
The raw data consist of electronically submitted data by the MS and non‐MS. The data that must be submitted consist of testing data and case‐based data of bovine animals and small ruminants according to the reporting periods (monthly basis) as described in Chapter B.I of Annex III.
Electronically submitted data are stored in the EU database and can be consulted using business intelligence tools (Business Objects). The electronically submitted data were extracted from the EU database and further processed by EFSA in order to summarise the information and to elaborate the summary tables presented in the current EU annual report.
The remaining data (e.g. genotype data, bovine animals tested according the required age classes) were provided by the MS in their annual reports submitted in accordance with Article 6.4 of, and as specified in Chapter B.I Annex III to, the TSE Regulation.
Genotype data for positive scrapie ovine cases and for national representative sampling were retrieved from annual reports submitted by the MS. Data from both the cases and the sample of genotyped sheep were as described in Regulation (EC) 999/2001 Chapter A, Part II, point 8.1 or point 8.2. The annual reports were also used to validate the data retrieved on the surveillance activities carried out on species other than bovine, ovine and caprine animals.
Finally, information on population of small ruminants in 2015 as presented in Table 5 and the number of BSE cases worldwide as presented in Table 9 were obtained from the last available report on the monitoring and testing of ruminants for the presence of TSEs in the EU (European Commission, 2016) and OIE (http://www.oie.int/wahis).
The data in this report refer only to the samples collected and confirmed cases reported between 1 January 2015 and 31 December 2015 in the EU and in the additional three non‐MS European Free Trade Association (EFTA) reporting countries (Iceland, Norway and Switzerland (including Lichtenstein)). EFSA validated the 2015 data by checking for inconsistencies between the data in the annual reports and the electronically extracted data, and by comparing the reported data with previous years. Consultation with data providers in the reporting countries was conducted during this validation.
For some tables and figures, historical data (period 2001–2015) were extracted from the EU TSE database. As certain MS and non‐MS may calculate their annual statistics using different reporting criteria (e.g. based on the date of final test results rather than the date of sampling), the data in this report may differ slightly from the national figures published by the single MS for 2015. In addition, subsequent submissions of updated/amended data by the MS may have resulted in differences in the figures included in this report when compared with the same data presented in the previous EU summary reports.
The current report should be considered the EC summary report for 2015 in compliance with Section II Chapter B Annex III of the TSE Regulation.
The names of the countries are referred to the MS, if they are members of the EU 28, or to the non‐MS countries when they belong to the EFTA reporting countries. The non‐MS in this report are Iceland, Norway and Switzerland. The data regarding Switzerland contain those of Lichtenstein region. The countries are quoted in this report by using the country codes from the Nomenclature of Units for Territorial Statistics (NUTS) or the English name according to Regulation (EC) No 1059/20036.
For some tables and figures the surveillance target groups, mentioned in Sections 1.2.1 and 1.2.2, were combined into the following categories: FS, ES and AM in bovine animals are included in the group ‘risk animals’: the word ‘risk’ is used here to indicate those animals whose probability of detection of the disease is higher than in the surveillance target group HS. The risk animals do not refer to animals that experienced a higher level of exposure.
To describe the results of the TSE surveillance programme in the EU in 2015, a number of figures and tables have been produced along with a short narrative text to describe the main findings. The report is split into three sections: bovine animals (cattle), small ruminants (sheep and goats) and other species. Both aggregated data and individual data at the national level are presented. Where it was considered relevant, multiyear data are shown: surveillance data were available for the period 2001–2015 in bovine animals, for 2002–2015 in small ruminants and for 2015 in other species.
In the case of cattle, computations were based on the total number of tests performed in 2015 by the MS and surveillance target group, and historically since 2001, and the caseload (i.e. absolute number of cases) for the reporting year and historically, including a description of the BSE cases confirmed. Additional epidemiological parameters have been estimated, for example, absolute number of cases or proportions (cases per million tests) by case type (e.g. C‐BSE, H‐BSE, L‐BSE) and/or surveillance target group, and proportions (cases per million of tests) by age class and by year, among others. These have been used to describe the evolution of the BSE epidemic and to put into context the findings of the reporting year.
In order to obtain relevant epidemiological information about the BSE cases detected in 2015, EFSA requested, via a small questionnaire sent by e‐mail, the concerned MS to provide additional information not submitted routinely by reporting countries for these cases.
To carry out an age‐period analysis, the age‐specific cases per million of tests over time were obtained for either C‐BSE or atypical BSE (H‐ and L‐type). The relevant denominators (number of tests over time by age class) were obtained in the following way: in the EU database, most information about the age of tested cattle was available as closed age classes (e.g. ‘24–35’, ‘36–48’ months, etc.) with exception for the first (‘< 24 months’) and the last classes (> 156 months). However, many data were affected by a large proportion of either missing or unspecific age classes as well as open age classes (e.g. ‘> 24’ or ‘> 48’ months). In order to make available age‐specific denominators for the whole data set, an imputation technique was applied to all records with missing or not meaningful age classes. The following three‐step technique was used: The data set was split in two subdata sets, one containing the animals with missing or open age classes, and a second containing only animals with 1‐year closed age classes.Both data sets were divided into three periods according to the years in which the main changes in surveillance legislation has been enforced (Table 2): period 1 from 2001 to 2008: cattle to be tested according to Reg (EC) No 999/2001 and 1248/2001, i.e. HS ≥ 30 months and at risk (FS, ES, AM) ≥ 24 months; period 2 from 2009 to 2012: cattle to be tested according to Dec 2008/908/CE and Dec 2011/358/CE, i.e. HS ≥ 48 months during 2009–2010, ≥ 72 months during 2011–2012 and at risk (FS, ES, AM) ≥ 48 months; period 3 from 2013 to 2015: cattle to be tested according to Dec 2013/76/CE, i.e. HS no test and at risk (FS, ES, AM) ≥ 48 months.Finally, for each surveillance period, the age distribution observed in animals with closed age classes was used to assign the age class to cattle with missing or open age classes.
Different age classes were used in case of atypical BSE because the number of cases per year was much lower than the C‐BSE cases. The number of cases was collapsed into 2‐year age classes and number of tests in testing campaigns based on 2‐year wide‐bands. Since the number of years of BSE active surveillance are uneven (15), 2‐year testing campaigns were obtained after disregarding the results for 2001, leading to the exclusion of two atypical cases that had been identified in the recent retrospective exercise using discriminatory tests.
Also, in the case of small ruminants, descriptive statistics were used to analyse the data and where possible descriptions and calculations were stratified according to the available variables in the database such as: surveillance target group (SHC, NSHC, SU, EM), flock status (infected, other, unknown, non‐infected), surveillance activity (passive surveillance, i.e. restricted to SU, vs active surveillance, i.e. restricted to SHC and NSHC in non‐infected flocks), country, year (since 2002), case type (i.e. classical scrapie (CS) or AS), index case (yes/no).
In order to see an evolution (period 2002–2015) in the number of CS cases over the number of AS cases, an annual ratio (CS/AS) was plotted for each MS. A correction was applied for those MS for which the numerator or denominator was equal to zero. In those cases, the ratio was replaced by a value calculated using the following formula: (CS + 0.5)/(AS + 0.5). No calculation was carried out for years in which neither CS nor AS were detected. A log scale was used for the Y‐axis to include all surveillance target groups in the same figure.
Finally, the classification originally developed by the Great Britain's National Scrapie Plan (NSP) was used to summarise and describe the genotyping data. Moreover, in order to identify the evolution of the effect of breeding against resistance in some MS, the five NSP groups were recategorised in three groups, namely, resistant (homozygous ARR), semiresistant (heterozygous ARR except ARR/VRQ), and susceptible (non‐ARR/VRQ).
In order to describe and plot the reported data, some assumptions were made for reporting the results in bovine animals and small ruminants (sheep and goats).
To plot the temporal evolution of the BSE cases (C‐BSE, L‐BSE and H‐BSE), the cases for which the type was reported as ‘unknown’ or were missing were assumed to be C‐BSE since most of these cases were reported before 2005.
In small ruminants, the following assumptions were considered: To plot the reported scrapie cases according to the flock status, it was assumed that flocks with reported status as ‘unknown’, ‘other’ or blank were assumed to have been reported as ‘not‐ infected flocks’.To describe the evolution of the total number index cases of scrapie, it was assumed that all index cases (yes) were confirmed in non‐infected flocks. If index case was reported as ‘no’ or ‘unknown’, these cases were assumed to have been reported as ‘infected flocks’.To describe the results of the discriminatory testing in TSE, it was assumed that all scrapie cases with results (BSE‐like, non‐BSE‐like, inconclusive) in the primary or secondary molecular tests have been submitted to discriminatory testing.
Circa 114 million bovine animals were tested during the period 2001–2015. As shown in Figure 3, the number of bovine samples tested for BSE decreased year by year. In 2015, there was a reduction of nearly 40% in the total number of bovine samples tested compared with the previous year, from 2.3 to 1.4 million tests. This decrease is mostly due to a reduction in the number of animals tested in the HS target group: from 1,384,862 in 2014 to 491,052 in 2015 (Table 6). Changes in the EU legislation over time and its implementation at the national level explain an additional reduction in testing within the other surveillance target groups over the years, although at a lower scale.
The number of cattle tested for BSE per reporting country for each surveillance target group in 2015 is shown in Table 6. One‐third of all samples tested was obtained from the HS surveillance target group. The number of tested bovine animals per MS and per age category for each of the target surveillance groups as well as the proportion of animals tested (at risk animals and HS) with relation to adult bovine animals population, are summarised in Appendix A (Tables A.1–A.5).
In 2015, five BSE cases in four different MS (Ireland, Slovenia, Spain and the UK) were reported from the 28 reporting MS. All cases were detected in the FS target group, in which 866,208 animals were tested. Two cases were confirmed as C‐BSE, both were born after the EU‐wide reinforcement of the feed ban in 2001 (BARB cases born in 2009 and 2010). The remaining three cases were atypical BSE (two H‐BSE and one L‐BSE). The atypical cases were detected in old animals (all > 144 months), whereas the two C‐BSE cases were of the age classes 60–71 and 72–83 months.
In 2015, one BSE case was detected in one non‐MS (Norway). This case was detected in the FS target group and was atypical (H‐BSE).
BSE cases by type, age and country are summarised in Table 7.
Epidemiological information relating to the positive cases, e.g. the presence of clinical symptoms, herd size, herd type, animal and feed type was collected and is summarised in Table 8. This additional information was obtained by a small questionnaire sent to the reporting officers of the implicated countries.
In relation to C‐BSE and compared with the two previous years (two C‐BSE cases in 2013 and three in 2014), there was no apparent difference in either the absolute number of cases (Figure 4 and Table 9) or the proportion of cases per million tests (Figure 5). The overall decreasing trend of C‐BSE in the EU and worldwide has reached a phase of very low occurrence, with eight cases of C‐BSE reported in the last 3 years.
With regard to atypical BSE, there is a low occurrence of both H‐type and L‐type over time. Because of the introduction of mandatory discriminatory testing and the retrospective discriminatory testing of cases, 96.6% of all cases confirmed between 2003 and 2015 have been subject to discriminatory testing. In total, 621 cases (18%) remain with unknown status (Table 10). The total number of atypical BSE cases reported by the 31 reporting countries, during the period 2003–2015 was 100 (2.8% of all cases subject to discriminatory testing): 45 H‐type and 55 L‐Type. In 2015, three cases were reported: two H‐type cases in Slovenia and the UK, respectively, and one L‐type case in Spain.
Considering the year of birth of all reported and confirmed C‐BSE cases, it is clear from Figure 6 that the peak in the number of confirmed cases was reached in the 1995 birth cohort. Assuming that exposure to the BSE agent occurs mainly during the first year of life, this means that exposure to the BSE agent started to decline in the EU in the mid‐1990s.
In addition, the age of the individual cases was used to better describe the trend in the C‐BSE epidemic and more in particular for the ‘risk animals’. Figure 7A shows the evolution of the age‐specific proportion of C‐BSE cases (i.e. cases per million tests) among ‘risk animals’ over subsequent annual testing campaigns from 2001 to 2015 in the EU. Each line shows the prevalence of cases per million tests in each age class and testing year.
Two main patterns are observed in Figure 7A when considering the different annual testing campaigns. First, from 2002 onwards, there is a decrease in the occurrence of the disease, as shown by the lower peak in the number of cases per million tests by test year. Second, there is an increase in the prevalence of older age classes in subsequent years, as shown by the progressive shift towards the right‐hand side of the chart.
Age‐specific graphs for atypical H‐type BSE (Figure 7B) and atypical L‐type BSE (Figure 7C) are shown for comparison. Because of the lower number of atypical cases, it is not possible to observe similar patterns in the figures.
Assuming that new cases of BSE may re‐emerge over time, particular attention should focus on cases occurring in young animals. Figure 8 shows the number of BSE cases (all types) in cattle < 60 months of age and provides information of (re)emergence of BSE in this young age group. Since 2008, no cases have been detected in the age class < 60 months.
Since 2002, around 8.4 million small ruminants have been tested for TSEs in the EU. After a peak in 2006 due to changes in the TSE Regulation, the overall number of sheep and goats tested for TSE has decreased continuously over time (Figures 9 and 10). In 2015, a total of 319,638 sheep and 135,857 goats were tested. Among non‐infected flocks in both species, there is a decreasing trend in the number of sheep and goats notified as clinical suspects and tested as TSE suspects (SU target group). This highlights both the decrease in the number of clinical cases and the lower awareness of scrapie among stakeholders. The same trend can be observed for sheep and goats tested in the EM target group. However, it is not clear whether there is a misclassification in the database due to the large number of flocks with status ‘unknown’ and ‘other’ and the fact that there were in the past a number of animals reported as tested in the target group of eradication measures but sourced from non‐infected flocks.
Differences between the MS with relation to the number of tested animals during 2015 have been summarised in Tables 11 and 12. Due to the differences in the size of the small ruminant population, the national surveillance efforts differ across reporting countries. Taking into account the number of samples tested in the target groups SHC and NSHC, and those required according to the TSE regulation (Table 5), 24 and 25 MS fulfilled the requirements in sheep and goats, respectively.
As a result of the TSE surveillance programme in the 28 reporting MS, a total of 641 and 1,052 scrapie cases were reported in 2015 in sheep and goats, respectively. In addition, 40 cases of scrapie in sheep were reported by the two non‐MS: 30 cases in Iceland and 10 cases in Norway. Of the 641 cases of scrapie in sheep, 124 were AS (19.4%), 498 were CS (77.7%) and 19 were of unknown type (2.9%). In goats, only 14 cases (1.3%) were declared atypical.
In absolute numbers, CS is the most frequently reported type of scrapie in the EU. The relative proportion of AS to CS (after excluding the cases of Cyprus) in sheep is double compared to goats (0.21 and 0.10, respectively).
CS was reported in sheep by 10 different MS (and in Iceland) and in goats by eight MS (Table 13). AS was reported in sheep by 16 different MS plus two non‐MS (Iceland and Norway) and in goats from six MS. A total of 516 of all sheep scrapie cases in the EU (80.5%) were reported by four countries, namely, Greece, Italy, Romania and Spain.
The unusually high number of cases in goats compared with sheep is explained by the large epidemic of scrapie in Cyprus, because 924 out of the 1,052 cases in 2015 were reported by Cyprus, with only 17 cases reported as index cases. This is lower than the number of cases reported by Cyprus in 2014 (1,364 scrapie cases in goats and 26 are reported as index cases).
The evolution of the absolute number of scrapie cases detected at the EU level is shown for each species in Figure 11. After a peak in the number of reported cases in 2006 and 2007 (when the number of tests also peaked), neither CS nor AS has shown a clear decline in the last 6 years. In the case of goats, this trend has to be interpreted with caution because of the great influence of one single MS, i.e. Cyprus, where the number of detected cases peaked in 2013 (Table 14). Looking at the total number of cases by type and surveillance target group (Figure 12), CS cases are reported more frequently among the NSHC target group than among the other surveillance target groups.
Figure 13 shows the evolution of the proportion of cases (per 10,000 tests) in non‐infected flocks, which has remained stable over the last 10 years.
In the case of goats, for many years the proportion of CS cases per 10,000 animals tested was, and still remains, higher than the proportion of AS cases. This may reflect the large, persistent epidemics ongoing in Cyprus.
In general, the number of CS cases per 10,000 in NSHC animals seems to be higher than the number of CS cases SHC animals. This pattern is less clear in the case of AS.
Table 14 shows the cases of scrapie between 2002 and 2015 by species, scrapie type and reporting country.
In order to see an evolution (period 2002–2015) in the number of classical scrapie cases compared to the number of atypical cases, an annual ratio CS/AS was plotted for each MS (Figure 14). It is clear that some MS only detected classical cases while others detected only atypical cases. The CS/AS plot can be interpreted under the assumption that the occurrence of AS is homogeneously distributed in the EU and that the occurrence of AS is not influenced by breeding programmes (EFSA BIOHAZ Panel, 2010, 2014). There are a number of MS for which the CS/AS ratio has decreased over time, for example, Germany, France, Ireland, the Netherlands and the UK (this is shown by a decrease in the ratios crossing the line at 1, in which the number of cases of CS and AS would be equal). In some MS, such as Greece, Italy and Romania, the number of CS cases is consistently higher than the number of AS cases over time (line always above 1). There is another group of countries (Austria, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Croatia, Poland, Portugal and Sweden) in which more AS cases than CS cases were confirmed (line always below 1). However, if CS is more likely to be detected in animals tested within the target group NSCH compared to SHC, the trend of the ratio CS/AS may in part reflect differences across countries or across time of the ratio of NSHC/SHC tested animals.
Figure 15 (A, sheep and B, goats) shows that the age of AS cases (mean: 79.3 months with standard error (SE): 0.86 and mean: 82.2 months with SE: 3.53 in sheep and goats, respectively) is higher than that of CS cases (mean: 45.6, SE: 0.18 and mean: 49.9 months, SE: 0.22 in sheep and goats, respectively). This observation is the same for all surveillance target groups. However, for AS cases detected in sheep for the EM and SU targets groups, this is trend is less obvious because of the low numbers of AS cases detected in 2011, 2012 and 2013.
Table 15 summarises the number of discriminatory tests performed after detecting a scrapie case by the MS during 2015. In sheep, 62% of the cases were submitted to discriminatory testing, whereas this figure was 12% in goats. In sheep, apart for a small proportion (4.5%) of inconclusive results, all scrapie cases were submitted to discriminatory testing (386 of 404 cases in the EU 28 and three non‐MS or 95.5%) were confirmed as being CS cases (BSE excluded). The proportion was the same in goats in 117 of 124 cases (94.3%) submitted to discriminatory testing, BSE was excluded.
In sheep, according to Regulation (EC) 999/2001 Annex III Chapter A Part I point 8, the genotype, and, where possible, the breed, of each positive case (according to point 8.1) should be determined. A random sample of ovine animals (according to point 8.2) should also be genotyped.
The classification of genotypes according to the Great Britain's NSP is summarised in Table 16. A three‐tier classification is also reported, as described in Section 2, in order to show evolution of the genotype distribution in sheep populations within the EU.
Table 17 shows the genotypes of scrapie cases by reporting country reported in 2015 in the EU and other reporting countries.
In total, 429 (95%) out of the 450 cases of CS in sheep (95%) reported in 2015 in the EU (Table 17) were from the susceptible genotype groups NSP3, NSP3O, NSP4 and NSP5; consistent with the pattern observed in all cases reported since 2002 (Figure 16). In AS, the same genotype groups accounted for 61% of all cases.
When aggregated at the EU level, the resistant genotype group accounts for between 65% and 75% of the total number of sheep genotyped over the past 5 years, whereas the susceptible group accounts, after excluding Cyprus, for less than 20% (Table 18 and Figure 17).
Table 18 shows the genotypes obtained from the sample of tested sheep by MS in 2015 in the EU and other reporting non‐MS.
In 2015, three MS (Estonia, Finland and Hungary) and one non‐MS (Norway) reported results on samples tested for TSE in species other than bovine, ovine and caprine animals. In total, 580 samples were tested in the EU and 17 samples tested by Norway in different species. None of the samples tested positive. More than 90% of the tested samples were from cat (Felis catus) followed by mink (Mustela lutreola) and fox (genus Vulpes).
In 2015, there was an almost 40% reduction in the total number of bovine samples tested compared with the previous year, moving from 2.3 to 1.4 million. Tests performed in cattle in the EU are mainly based on the exhaustive testing of risk animals over 48 months of age, which increases the probability of detecting cases even if at a very low rate, compared with random sampling of the slaughtered populations. Five BSE cases were reported by four different MS: one C‐BSE case reported by both Ireland and the UK, and three atypical BSE cases – two H‐type in Slovenia and the UK, and one L‐type in Spain. One additional atypical case (H‐type) has been detected in Norway.
The reliability of BSE categorisation by case type has improved over time in countries that detected BSE cases, because, samples from a large proportion of cases were submitted to discriminatory testing (either retrospectively or prospectively).
Surveillance data reflects, either in terms of absolute number of cases reported or prevalence, a pattern consistent with a decline in the European BSE epidemic. However, there were no differences in 2015 with respect to the recent previous years: a similar number of cases were detected, either of classical BSE (two and three cases in 2013 and 2014, respectively) or atypical BSE (five and eight cases in 2013 and 2014, respectively). The two C‐BSE cases reported in 2015 were born in 2010 (Ireland) and 2009 (the UK), i.e. 14 and 13 years, respectively, after the enforcement of the feed ban in these countries (BARB cases).
Age‐period analysis of the surveillance data confirms a decrease in the occurrence of C‐BSE over time, associated with an increase in the age class with the highest prevalence over the years. This pattern indicates that the measures applied to control the main risk factors (e.g. feed ban) have been effective in reducing the burden of the disease. A similar conclusion is also justified by the fact that the highest level of detection occurred in animals born in 1995, when the decline commenced.
No cases of BSE have been detected in the last 7 years in cattle aged < 60 months. However, current monitoring of risk animals (i.e. AM, ES and FS) > 48 months of age allows for the detection of such cases. The detection of cases among young animals may represent an important early warning of a potential re‐emergence of a BSE epidemic.
Since 2002, ca 8.4 million small ruminants have been tested in the frame of the EU‐wide TSE surveillance. In 2015 a total of 319,638 sheep and 135,857 goats were tested. Among non‐infected flocks in both species, there is a decreasing trend in the number of sheep and goats from non‐infected flocks tested as TSE suspects (SU target group). There is high between‐country heterogeneity with relation to the implementation of the surveillance activities as per the EU legislation. Considering the required samples to be taken within the SHC and NSHC target surveillance groups, 24 and 25 MS fulfilled the requirements in sheep and goats, respectively.
Surveillance activities carried out in 2015 in the EU 28 led to the detection of 641 and 1,052 scrapie cases in sheep and goats, respectively. Ovine scrapie was reported by 18 MS and caprine scrapie by nine MS, even though in the case of goats 90% of the cases were reported by Cyprus.
There is no clear overall trend of improvement in the epidemiological situation of scrapie in small ruminants either in terms of absolute number of cases or proportion of cases. However, in a number of countries a decreasing trend in the annual ratios of CS/AS was observed.
Genotyping data consistently confirm the association between genotype and CS and that the proportion of susceptible animals in the sampled population has decreased over the recent years.
In 2015, 580 samples from species other than domestic ruminants (including wild animals) were tested in three MS and one non‐MS (Estonia, Finland, Hungary and Norway); no positives were reported.
AMante mortemASatypical scrapieBARBborn after the revised feed banBSEbovine spongiform encephalopathyC‐BSEclassical bovine spongiform encephalopathyCSclassical scrapieEFTAEuropean Free Trade AssociationELISAenzyme‐linked immunosorbent assayEMeradication measuresESemergency slaughteredEURLEuropean Union Reference LaboratoryFSfallen stockH‐BSEH‐type bovine spongiform encephalopathyIHCimmunohistochemistryHShealthy slaughteredL‐BSEL‐type bovine spongiform encephalopathyMSMember StateNRLNational Reference LaboratoriesNSHCnot slaughtered for human consumptionNSPNation Scrapie PlanNUTSNomenclature of Units for Territorial StatisticsOIETerrestrial Animals of the World Organisation for Animal HealthSHCslaughtered for human consumptionSAFscrapie‐associated fibrilsSUBSE suspectTSEtransmissible spongiform encephalopathyWBwestern blot
AustriaATBelgiumBEBulgariaBGCroatiaHRCyprusCYCzech RepublicCZDenmarkDKEstoniaEEFinlandFIFranceFRGermanyDEGreeceELHungaryHUIcelandISIrelandIEItalyITLatviaLVLithuaniaLTLuxembourgLUMaltaMTNetherlandsNLNorwayNOPolandPLPortugalPTRomaniaROSlovakiaSKSloveniaSISpainESSwedenSESwitzerlandCHUnited KingdomUKMS countries: AT; BE; BG; HR; CY; CZ; DK; EE; FI; FR; DE; EL; HU; IE; IT; LV; LT; LU; MT; NL; PL; PT; RO; SK; SI; ES; SE; UK.EFTA Countries (non‐MS countries): CH (including Lichtenstein); IS; NO.