AbstractAtlanto‐axial instability (AAI) is a congenital or developmental condition that leads to instability/subluxation of the atlantoaxial joint. This study is performed to determine anatomic feasibility of trajectory L and help select an optimal screw trajectory in treating patients with AAI with a narrow C1 posterior arch. Sixty patients who underwent cervical three dimensional‐computed tomography (3D‐CT) were chosen from the hospital's picture archiving and communication system (PACS). Aquilion Multi 64 helical CT was used to perform CT examinations and measurements on patients. Based on CT images, the trajectory L and M for each C1 pedicle were established. Posterior arch height was measured on C1 coronal image. The medullary cavity width along trajectory M was narrower than trajectory L. The medullary cavity width that was less than 3.5 mm was found in 12.5% pedicles along trajectory M and 2.5% along trajectory L. The posterior arch height along trajectory L was significantly higher than that of trajectory M. Posterior arch height that was less than 3.5 mm was found in 74.2% pedicles along trajectory M and only 16.7% along trajectory L. The pedicle length along trajectory L was significantly longer than trajectory M. Trajectory angles for C1 pedicles had an average of 9.08° ± 4.66° along trajectory L and 14.53° ± 4.03° along trajectory M. The Optimal entry point of trajectory L was 5.4 mm medial to trajectory M. Based on our results, this study suggests that C1 pedicle screw trajectory with lateral inclination yielded a good outcome in the treatment of AAI.

The atlanto‐axial junction, also known as the atlanto‐axial joint is a joint in the upper neck that is located between the first and second cervical vertebrae. The first cervical vertebrae is also known by the name, the atlas (C1) and the second cervical vertebrate known as the axis (C2) [1]. An excessive movement at the atlanto‐axial junction caused by either a bony or ligamentous abnormality may lead to a condition known as atlanto‐axial instability (AAI). AAI may originate from conginal conditions, but in adults, it primarily originates from trauma or degenerative changes due to inflammatory disease such as rheumatoid arthritis [2]. Approaches used to treat AAI include posterior atlantoaxial fixation, which has been deemed to be an effective method to treat AAI [3]. In recent years, many types of posterior screw fixation techniques for AAI for treatment have been introduced, such as bilateral C1 lateral mass and C2 pedicle screw fixation, posterior C1–2 transarticular screw fixation and posterior atlantoaxial pedicle screw fixation [[4], [5], [6]]. Resnick and Benzel initially proposed the concept of C1 pedicle screw placement [7]. The screw is inserted into the lateral mass through the posterior arch or “pedicle” [8]. This starting point avoids the large venous plexus that surrounds the C2 nerve root beneath the C1 posterior arch [9]. Recently, the C1 pedicle screw technique has been popularized for C1 rigid stable fixation and has many advantages such as a high fusion rate and fewer complications; less venous plexus bleeding and irritation of the C2 nerve root; and greater cortical purchase and longer screw trajectory length than the atlas lateral mass screw technique, making it more suitable for short‐segment fixation [[10], [11], [12], [13], [14]]. However, the C1 pedicle screw technique still has certain limitations, which includes the thin outer bone of the C1 posterior arch such that the screw or drill may slip to the side during the operation, leading to damage to the vertebral artery. Thus, in situation like this, some surgeons would perform an alternate technique for patients with a C1 posterior arch measuring no more than 4 mm to avoid vertebral artery injury [12]. That may not achieve reliable biomechanical fixation. Hence, we designed a trajectory L, which has entry point close to posterior tubercle and trajectory angle with lateral inclination, for the treatment of patients who have an abnormally thin outer bone at the C1 posterior arch. Morphological measurements were performed in order to determine the anatomic feasibility of trajectory L and help select an optimal screw trajectory for the treatment of patients with AAI with a narrow C1 posterior arch.
Sixty patients (38 males and 22 females; mean age, 54.1 years; range, 30–81 years) who underwent cervical three dimensional‐computed tomography (3D‐CT) at our hospital were randomly chosen from the hospital's picture archiving and communication system (PACS) between 2013 and 2015 for this study. Patients aged younger than 18 years old or suffered from these disorders, such as fractures, tumors, infections, rheumatoid diseases, and malformations that affected bone morphology of the atlas were precluded in the study.
Aquilion Multi 64 helical CT (Toshiba Tungaloy Co. Ltd., Nirasaki, Japan) was used to perform CT examinations and measurements on patients. Patients were positioned in the supine position with neutral position of the cervical spine. Scanning parameters: thickness 1 mm, pitch 0.938, distance 0.5 mm, tube tension 120 kV, electric current 250 mA, window width 1000, and window level 300. CT scanning operated at 120 kV, 54 mA, 10 × 10 cm field of view, 512 × 512 matrix, and a table speed of 1 mm/0.5 s.
As presented in Fig. 1, based on CT images, there were trajectory L and M (two screw trajectories) for each C1 pedicle. On the C1 axial image, the trajectory L′ central axis was parallel to the medial border tangent of the transverse foramen and the lateral border tangent to the vertebral canal (Fig. 1, left). The screw trajectory M′ central axis was parallel to the lateral border tangent to the vertebral canal and the odontoid foramen (Fig. 1, right). Posterior arch height was measured on C1 coronal image (Fig. 2). The images were analyzed using the Picture Archiving Communication System (Agfa Corporation, Ridge field, NJ).
SPSS 22.0 software (IBM Corp. Armonk, NY, USA) was used for statistical analysis. A variance component analysis was also performed for the study. Measurement data were presented as mean ± standard deviation. Enumeration data were expressed as a percentage. Comparisons of the data related to the C1 pedicle (medullary cavity width, external pedicle wall, posterior arch height, pedicle length, trajectory angle, distance between posterior tubercle as well as optimal entry point) between trajectories were performed using a paired t‐test. The differences between male and female were calculated with an independent samples t‐test. Values of p < 0.05 indicated a significant difference.
Among sixty patients, the measurements related to the C1 pedicle screw insertion along trajectory L and trajectory M are displayed in Table 1. These results revealed that no statistical significance was detected in the width of the external pedicle wall along trajectory L and trajectory M (p > 0.050). On the other hand, the medullary cavity width along trajectory M was remarkably narrower than trajectory L (p < 0.001). Although all external pedicle wall widths were greater than 3.5 mm, the medullary cavity width that was less than 3.5 mm was found in 12.5% pedicles along trajectory M and 2.5% along trajectory L. The posterior arch height along trajectory L was significantly higher than that of trajectory M (p < 0.001). Posterior arch height that was less than 3.5 mm was found in 74.2% pedicles along trajectory M and only 16.7% along trajectory L. Additionally, pedicle length along trajectory L was significantly longer than trajectory M (p < 0.001). Trajectory angles for C1 pedicles had an average of 9.08° ± 4.66° along trajectory L and 14.53° ± 4.03° along trajectory M. The Optimal entry point of trajectory L was 5.4 mm medial to trajectory M. A sketch map of trajectory L, and trajectory M is shown in Supplementary Fig. 1.
The pedicles and laminae form the vertebral arch, and these two pedicles are short thick processes which could posteriorly extend from the junctions of the posterolateral surfaces on its upper surface of the centrum [15]. In order to form the posterior border of the vertebral foramen together with joining and completing the vertebral arch, a lamina projects are backwards and medially from each pedicle so as to complete the triangle of the vertebral foramen [16]. Similar to other pedicles, the connection of the C1 posterior arch and lateral mass conforms to the other vertebral pedicles in their anatomical structure and biomechanics [12]. The C1 pedicle screw placement technique is advantageous compared to inserting the pedicle screw directly into the lateral mass. Advantages include; improved strength of fixation, decreased C2 root irritation and resultant occipital neuralgia as well as decreased bleeding from the paravertebral venous plexus [[17], [18]]. As a result, the technique of the C1 posterior arch screw is becoming a popular alternative for C1 rigid stable fixation, especially for short‐segment cervical fixation [[19], [20]].
It has been found that patients who have a thin outer bone on the C1 posterior arch tend to experience slipping of the screw or drill to the side, which can injure the vertebral artery when establishing an entry point. Tan et al. [12] in his study also have mentioned the same problem and therefore, exposed the C1 “pedicle” by removing the outer portion that contains approximately 4 mm of long bone of the posterior arch. The posterior arch along the trajectory of the C1 posterior arch screw allowing us to enlarge the height of the screw entry point. However, the process of removing part of cortex of the C1 posterior arch may influence the screw pull‐out strength. Lee Xin et al. [10] introduced the notching technique by inserting the screw into the narrow posterior arch by notching the inferior arch and placing the screw outside the inferior wall and partially out of the posterior arch. Theoretically, like the lateral mass screw technique, the notching technique may pose a risk of injury to the C2 nerve root and venous plexus, similar to, when dissecting the inferior margin of the C1 posterior arch. In addition, the notching technique penetrates the inferior cortex of the posterior arch may contribute to a disrupted screw pull‐out strength. Our measurements show that the posterior arch heights along trajectory L were 5.47 ± 1.84 mm, which was significantly higher than trajectory M. We also found that 16.7% of the pedicles were smaller than 3.5 mm, which was also supported by several studies [21].
A lot of investigations have reported that the mediolateral diameter of the C1 pedicle isthmus is so large to insert a 3.5‐mm diameter screw through the pedicle [[9], [18]]. In our research, the external pedicle wall width along trajectory M was 9.96 ± 2.11 mm and 9.34 ± 2.53 mm in trajectory L. These measurements were all found to be greater than 3.5 mm or 4.0 mm of the screw diameter. However, the stability of the cervical pedicle screw is demonstrated to be largely relies on the internal features of the pedicle, but not so much on the external dimensions of the pedicle [22]. In recent years, multi planar CT rendered the potentials of the accurate measurement of both the inner and the outer pedicle diameters [23]. Selecting an optimal trajectory and assessing the safety of C1 pedicle screw trajectory base on an axial CT image is becoming increasingly significant for the measurement of C1 pedicle's medullary cavity width. Our results showed that the medullary cavity width along trajectory L is wider than that the medullary cavity along trajectory M by 1.71 mm. Moreover, medullary cavity width that was less than 3.5 mm was found in 12.5% of pedicles along trajectory M, and only 2.5% along trajectory L. If a trajectory along trajectory M could not embody a 3.5 mm diameter pedicle screw, a trajectory along L with more media entry point could provide with a wider medullary cavity width so as to minimize the risk of screw perforation.
Several studies [[10], [11], [13], [14], [19], [20]] reported that the C1 posterior arch screw technique provided more pull‐out strength and a longer screw trajectory in comparison to the lateral mass screw technique. The C1 posterior arch screw technique provides good biomechanical stability and effective fusion, especially in short‐segment rigid fixation. Therefore, the length of trajectory can help in determining the pull‐out strength and biomechanical stability. In our investigation, pedicle length along trajectory L was 28.46 ± 2.20 mm, which was significantly longer than the pedicle length along trajectory M (27.37 ± 1.93 mm). Therefore, we conclude that the pedicle screw along trajectory L may provide more pull‐out strength and better biomechanical stability than that along trajectory M.
Florian et al. reported that the medial inclination of the screw trajectory by approximately 10° enhances the safety of this procedure and helps avoid the vertebral artery injury in the C1 transverse foramen [9], this was in agreement to what Kwang et al. had demonstrated [24]. Despite these findings, our study suggested that the medullary cavity width along trajectory L is wilder than that along trajectory M, we also measured the maximum lateral inclination angle preoperatively on CT images, and creating a trajectory angle that was 5° smaller than the maximum lateral inclination angle during the operation (Fig. 3). We feel that this method could reduce the risk of the screw perforating into the vertebral foramen. Thus, the pedicle along trajectory L did not increase the risk of injuring vertebral artery theoretically.
During our investigation, several limitations should be noted and mentioned. One limitation was the lack of biomechanical comparison of relative biomechanical fixation strengths between trajectory L and trajectory M. Additionally, more clinical research needs to be performed and allow us to determine the possibility and safety of pedicle screw along trajectory L.
Our study provides evidence that C1 pedicle screw trajectory with lateral inclination yielded a higher posterior arch height and lateral mass height, a wider medullary cavity width, as well as a longer pedicle length compared to a medial inclination screw trajectory. A lateral inclination approach has been found to minimize screw perforation, improve safety of the surgery and provide a more pull‐out strength and better biomechanical stability. We also found that an entry point along trajectory L is closer to the posterior tubercle than trajectory M. This allows for a reduced dissection range in the operation as well as a lower risk of vertebral artery injury. Trajectory angles vary largely, so a preoperative CT scan is very important for this fixation method.
1.External pedicle wall width at the isthmus of the pedicle along each trajectory (EPW)2.Medullary cavity width at the isthmus of the pedicle along each trajectory (MCW)3.Posterior arch height located the optimal screw entry point of each trajectory (PAH)4.Total pedicle length along each trajectory (TPL)5.Trajectory angle along each trajectory (TA)6.The distance from the posterior tubercle of C1 to the optimal screw entry point of each trajectory (DPO)
The authors are grateful to reviewers for critical comments to the manuscript.