AbstractFollowing a request from the European Commission, the Panel on Additives and Products or Substances used in Animal Feed (FEEDAP) was asked to deliver a scientific opinion on the safety and efficacy of dry grape extract when added to water for drinking for all animal species and categories. The additive under assessment (dry grape extract) is a mixture of two extracts from the seeds and skin of Vitis vinifera subsp. vinifera. The FEEDAP Panel has previously issued an opinion on the safety and efficacy of this dry grape extract when added to feed. It was concluded that the additive is safe at the maximum proposed use level (100 mg/kg complete feed) for all animal species except dogs, for which no safe dietary concentration could be established. The FEEDAP Panel also concluded that there were no concerns for consumer safety and that no risks for the environment were to be expected and could not conclude on the safety for the user. Since consumer, user and environmental safety are independent of the mode of delivery of the additive, the conclusions reached in the previous opinion also apply to use in water. For a number of target species, the established safe concentration in feed could be exceeded if a maximum proposed dose in water (100 mg/L) was applied. Considering the margin of safety identified in the previous assessment, a maximum concentration of 50 mg/L water for drinking is considered safe for all animal species except dogs. Since the major component of the additive, the proanthocyanidin‐rich seed extract, is recognised to provide flavour in food and its function in water for drinking for animals would be essentially the same, no demonstration of efficacy is considered necessary.

Regulation (EC) No 1831/20031 establishes the rules governing the Community authorisation of additives for use in animal nutrition. In particular, Article 4(1) of that Regulation lays down that any person seeking authorisation for a feed additive or for a new use of a feed additive shall submit an application in accordance with Article 7.
The European Commission received a request from NOR‐FEED SUD2 for authorisation of the product dry grape extract, when used as a feed additive for all animal species (category: sensory additives; functional group: flavourings).
According to Article 7(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003, the Commission forwarded the application to the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) as an application under Article 4 (authorisation of a feed additive or authorisation of a new use of a feed additive already authorised). EFSA received directly from the applicant the technical dossier in support of this application. The particulars and documents in support of the application were considered valid by EFSA as of 17 June 2016.
According to Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003, EFSA after verifying the particulars and documents submitted by the applicant, shall undertake an assessment in order to determine whether the feed additive complies with the conditions laid down in Article 5. EFSA shall deliver an opinion on the safety for the target animals, consumer, user and the environment and on the efficacy of the dry grape extract, when used under the proposed conditions of use (see Section 3).
The feed additive dry grape extract is a polyphenol‐rich mixture of two extracts, one from the seeds and one from the skin of Vitis vinifera subsp. vinifera. It is classified as a sensory additive, functional group: flavourings.
The EFSA Panel on Additives and Products or Substances used in Animal Feed (FEEDAP Panel) issued an opinion on the safety and efficacy of dry grape extract as a feed flavouring for all animal species (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2016). It was concluded that the additive is safe at the maximum proposed use level (100 mg/kg complete feed) for all animal species except dogs, for which no safe dietary concentration could be established. The FEEDAP Panel also concluded that there were no concerns for consumer safety and that no risks for the environment were to be expected and could not conclude on the safety for the user.
The applicant is now seeking the authorisation for the use of this additive via water for drinking.
The present assessment is based on data submitted by the applicant in the form of a technical dossier3 in support of the authorisation request for the use of the dry grape extract as an additive to water for drinking. The technical dossier was prepared following the provisions of Article 7 of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003, Regulation (EC) No 429/20084 and the applicable EFSA guidance documents.
The FEEDAP Panel has sought to use the data provided by the applicant together with data from other sources, such as previous risk assessments by EFSA and experts' knowledge, to deliver the present output.
The European Union Reference Laboratory (EURL) considered that the conclusions and recommendations reached in the previous assessment are valid and applicable to the current application.5

The approach followed by the FEEDAP Panel to assess the safety and the efficacy of the Dry grape extract is in line with the principles laid down in Regulation (EC) No 429/2008 and the relevant guidance documents: Guidance for the preparation of dossiers for sensory additives (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2012) and the Statement on the use of feed additives authorised/applied for use in feed when supplied via water (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2010).
The additive is intended to be used in water for drinking for all animal species without a withdrawal period. The recommended level of inclusion in water for drinking is 2.5–100 mg/L water.
The feed additive dry grape extract is a polyphenol‐rich mixture of two extracts, one from the seeds and one from the skin of V. vinifera subsp. vinifera.
The additive which is the subject of the present application has the same specifications and method of manufacture as that considered in a previous opinion (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2016). The data pertaining to composition, impurities, physical properties and stability still apply. Only the properties related to its use in water for drinking are described below.
Solubility in water at ambient temperature was determined for three batches of the additive. The mean solubility of 50 g/L of dry grape extract was 91% (88–95%).7 Since the additive is soluble in water and readily dispersed, a demonstration of homogeneity in water for drinking is not considered necessary.
The stability of dry grape extract in water for drinking was monitored and no losses were seen.
In its previous opinion (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2016), the FEEDAP Panel concluded that the additive is safe at the maximum proposed use level (100 mg/kg complete feed) for all animal species except dogs, for which no safe dietary concentration could be established. The Panel also concluded that there were no concerns for consumer safety and that no risks for the environment were to be expected and could not conclude on the safety for the user.
Since consumer, user and environmental safety are independent of the mode of delivery of the additive, the conclusions reached in the previous opinion (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2016) also apply when the additive is used in water for drinking and are not further considered in this opinion.
The application is for a maximum of 100 mg additive/L water for drinking, which could lead to the delivery of a dose higher than the currently proposed maximum for feed (100 mg/kg complete feed). When used at the maximum proposed use level, the intake of the additive via water would be 2–3 times higher than feed intake for poultry, pigs and rabbits (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2010). For a number of target species, the established safe concentration in feed could be exceeded if a maximum proposed dose in water was applied. Considering the margin of safety identified in the previous assessment (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2016), a maximum concentration of 50 mg/L water for drinking is considered safe for all animal species except dogs.
In its previous assessment (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2016), the FEEDAP Panel concluded that the additive dry grape extract is efficacious when used in feed for all animal species. This conclusion was based on the consideration that the major component of the additive, the proanthocyanidin‐rich seed extract, is recognised to provide flavour in food and beverages (wine). Since its function in feed would be essentially the same, no demonstration of efficacy was considered necessary.
The FEEDAP Panel considers that this conclusion applies to the additive dry grape extract when used in water for drinking.
For a number of target species, the established safe concentration in feed could be exceeded if a maximum proposed dose in water was applied. Considering the margin of safety identified in the previous assessment, a maximum concentration of 50 mg/L water for drinking is considered safe for all animal species except dogs.
No safety concern would arise for the consumer or the environment from the use of the dry grape extract in water up to the highest safe level in feeds. The Panel cannot conclude on the safety for the users.
Since the major component of the additive, the proanthocyanidin‐rich seed extract, is recognised to provide flavour in food and beverages (wine) and its function in water for drinking for animals would be essentially the same, no demonstration of efficacy is considered necessary.

Dry grape extract for all animals species. May 2016. Submitted by NOR‐FEED SUD.Comments from Member States.


EURLEuropean Union Reference LaboratoryFEEDAPEFSA Scientific Panel on Additives and Products or Substances used in Animal Feed
