AbstractIn accordance with Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005, the evaluating Member State (EMS), Spain, received an application from United Phosphorus Ltd. to modify the existing maximum residue level (MRL) for the active substance mancozeb in persimmons. To accommodate for the intended use of mancozeb, Spain proposed to raise the existing MRL from the limit of quantification of 0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg. Spain drafted an evaluation report in accordance with Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005, which was submitted to the European Commission and forwarded to EFSA. According to EFSA, the data are sufficient to derive a MRL proposal of 0.2 mg/kg (expressed as carbon disulfide) for the proposed use on persimmons. Adequate analytical enforcement methods are available to control the residues of carbon disulfide on persimmons. Based on the risk assessment results, EFSA concludes that the proposed use of mancozeb on persimmons will not result in a consumer exposure exceeding the toxicological reference value and therefore is unlikely to pose a consumer health risk.

In accordance with Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005, the evaluating Member State (EMS), Spain, received an application from United Phosphorus Ltd. to modify the existing maximum residue level (MRL) for the active substance mancozeb in persimmons. To accommodate for the intended use of mancozeb, Spain proposed to raise the existing MRL from the limit of quantification (LOQ) of 0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg. Spain drafted an evaluation report in accordance with Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005, which was submitted to the European Commission and forwarded to the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) on 5 February 2016.
EFSA bases its assessment on the evaluation report submitted by the EMS, the draft assessment report (DAR) prepared under Council Directive 91/414/EEC, the Commission review report on mancozeb, the Joint Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR) Evaluation report, as well as the conclusions from previous EFSA opinions on dithiocarbamates.
The toxicological profile of mancozeb was assessed in the framework of the evaluation process under Directive 91/414/EEC and the data were sufficient to derive an acceptable daily intake (ADI) of 0.05 mg/kg bw per day and an acute reference dose (ARfD) of 0.6 mg/kg bw.
The metabolism of mancozeb in primary crops was investigated in the fruit, root, cereal/grass and pulses/oilseeds crop groups following foliar applications. On the basis of these metabolism studies, the residue definition was proposed as mancozeb (expressed as carbon disulfide (CS2)) for enforcement and risk assessment. In Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 it was decided to establish a screening residue definition for dithiocarbamates as CS2 including maneb, mancozeb, metiram, propineb, thiram and ziram, as CS2 is the common moiety generated by analytical methods used for all dithiocarbamates. For the use in persimmons, EFSA concludes that the metabolism of mancozeb has been sufficiently addressed and the residue definition derived is applicable.
EFSA concludes that the submitted residue trials are sufficient to derive a MRL proposal of 0.20 mg/kg on persimmons. Adequate analytical enforcement methods are available to monitor the residues of CS2 in persimmons at the achievable LOQ of 0.05 mg/kg.
Residues of mancozeb in commodities of animal origin and in rotational crops were not considered in the current assessment as the persimmons are permanent crops and are not fed to livestock.
The consumer risk assessment was performed with revision 2 of the EFSA Pesticide Residues Intake Model (PRIMo). A long‐term consumer intake concern was not identified for any of the European diets incorporated in the EFSA PRIMo. The highest calculated chronic intake was calculated to be 72% of the ADI (German, child). The contribution of residues in persimmons to the total consumer exposure accounted for a maximum of 0.01% of the ADI (WHO Cluster B). An acute consumer risk was not identified in relation to the MRL proposal. The highest acute consumer exposure was calculated to be 1% of the ARfD for persimmons.
EFSA concludes that the intended use of mancozeb on persimmons will not result in a consumer exposure exceeding the toxicological reference values and therefore is unlikely to pose a concern for public health.
EFSA proposes to amend the existing MRL as reported in the summary table below.

Codea
CommodityExisting EU MRL (mg/kg)Proposed EU MRL (mg/kg)Comment/justification
Enforcement residue definition: Mancozeb, expressed as CS2
161060Persimmons0.05b
0.2Supported by SEU trials
EU: European Union; MRL: maximum residue level; SEU: southern Europe. CS2: carbon disulfide.
a
Commodity code number according to Annex I of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005.
b
Indicates that the MRL is set at the limit of analytical quantification (LOQ).


Regulation (EC) No 396/20051 (hereafter referred to as the Regulation) establishes rules governing the setting of pesticide maximum residue levels (MRLs) at European Union (EU) level. Article 6 of the Regulation lays down that any party having a legitimate interest or requesting an authorisation for the use of a plant protection product in accordance with Council Directive 91/414/EEC,2 repealed by Regulation (EC) No 1107/20093, shall submit to a Member State, when appropriate, an application to modify a MRL in accordance with the provisions of Article 7 of the Regulation.
Spain, hereafter referred to as the evaluating Member State (EMS), received an application from the company United Phosphorus Ltd.4 to modify the existing MRL for the active substance mancozeb in persimmons. This application was notified to the European Commission and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) and was subsequently evaluated by the EMS in accordance with Article 8 of the Regulation.
After completion, the evaluation report was submitted to the European Commission and to EFSA on 5 February 2016.
The application was included in the EFSA Register of Questions with the reference number EFSA‐Q‐2016‐00119 and the following subject:

Mancozeb – Modification of existing MRLs in persimmons

Spain proposed to raise the existing MRL of mancozeb in persimmons from the limit of quantification (LOQ) of 0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg.
EFSA proceeded with the assessment of the application and the evaluation report as required by Article 10 of the Regulation.
In accordance with Article 10 of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005, EFSA shall, based on the evaluation report provided by the EMS, provide a reasoned opinion on the risks to the consumer associated with the application.
The evaluation report submitted by the EMS (Spain, 2015) and the exposure calculations using the EFSA Pesticide Residues Intake Model (PRIMo) are considered as supporting documents to this reasoned opinion and, thus, are made publicly available.
In accordance with Article 11 of the Regulation, the reasoned opinion shall be provided as soon as possible and at the latest within 3 months (which may be extended to 6 months if more detailed evaluations need to be carried out) from the date of receipt of the application. If EFSA requests supplementary information, the time limit laid down shall be suspended until that information has been provided.
Mancozeb is the ISO common name for manganese ethylenebis dithiocarbamate (polymeric) complex with zinc salt (IUPAC). The chemical structure of the active substance and its main metabolite is reported in Appendix B.
Mancozeb was evaluated in the framework of Directive 91/414/EEC with Italy designated as rapporteur Member State (RMS). It was included in Annex I of this Directive by Directive 2005/72/EC5 which entered into force on 1 July 2006 for use as fungicide only. In accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 540/20116, mancozeb is approved under Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009, repealing Council Directive 91/414/EEC.
The representative uses evaluated in the peer review process were foliar applications on apples, grapes, tomatoes and potatoes. The draft assessment report (DAR) was not peer reviewed by EFSA; therefore, no EFSA conclusion is available.
No specific MRLs are set for mancozeb, but for a group of dithiocarbamates comprising maneb, mancozeb, metiram, propineb, thiram, ziram and the residues are expressed as carbon disulfide (CS2) which is the common moiety generated by analytical methods for all dithiocarbamates. However, specific MRLs have been established for propineb, thiram and ziram, as specific analytical methods are available for these three dithiocarbamates. MRLs for the dithiocarbamates are set in Annex II and Annex IIIB of the Regulation (EC) No 396/2005. Since the entry into force of this regulation, EFSA has issued several reasoned opinions on the modification of MRLs for dithiocarbamates. The proposals from these reasoned opinions have been considered in the preparation of EU legislation. The MRL changes that were reported in the EU legislation since the entry into force of the regulation are summarised in Table 1.
Codex Alimentarius has established maximum residue limits (CXLs) for a wide range of commodities, but no CXLs have been set for dithiocarbamates in persimmons.
The details of the intended GAP for mancozeb are given in Appendix A.
EFSA has based its assessment on the evaluation report submitted by the EMS (Spain, 2015), the DAR prepared under Directive 91/414/EEC (Italy, 2000), the Commission review report on mancozeb (European Commission, 2009), the Joint Meeting on Pesticide Residues (JMPR) Evaluation report (FAO, 2012) as well as the conclusions from previous EFSA opinions on dithiocarbamates (EFSA, 2009, 2010, 2011). The assessment is performed in accordance with the legal provisions of the Uniform Principles for the Evaluation and the Authorisation of Plant Protection Products adopted by Commission Regulation (EU) No 546/20117 and the currently applicable guidance documents relevant to the consumer risk assessment of pesticide residues (European Commission, 1996, 1997a,b,c,d,e,f,g, 2000, 2010a,b, 2015; FAO, 2009; OECD, 2011).
Analytical methods for the determination of mancozeb residues in plant commodities were submitted by the applicants and assessed by the RMS (Italy, 2000).
No specific enforcement method is available for mancozeb. Generally, analytical methods are based on the conversion of dithiocarbamates to CS2 moiety which is then measured by chromatography (HS‐GS, GC‐ECD, GC‐FPD, HPLC‐UVD, HPLC‐MSD) or colorimetry. For the determination of CS2 in commodity groups with high water‐, high acid content and in dry/starch commodities, the achievable LOQ is in the range of 0.01–0.10 mg/kg. The methods would not allow distinguishing which active substance belonging to the group of dithiocarbamates was originally applied on the crop. Therefore, the CS2 method is considered as a screening tool. In case of positive findings, the origin of the residue has to be identified by analysing the sample with specific methods which are however currently only available for the active substances thiram, propineb and ziram.
In addition, analytical methods are unable to distinguish between phytogenic CS2 sources (high values in crops belonging to Brassicaceae and Caricaceae families) thus resulting in false‐positive findings (Crnogorac et al., 2009). In addition, laboratories analysing samples for dithiocarbamates must pay particular attention to sample preparation, as dithiocarbamates are of low stability within plant matrices leading to possible losses of CS2.
As persimmons belong to the high‐water content commodity group and they do not belong to Brassicaceae and Caricaceae crops, no natural CS2 background level is expected.
EFSA concludes that adequate analytical methods are available for enforcing the MRL proposed for mancozeb in persimmons.
Analytical methods for the determination of residues in food of animal origin are not assessed in the current application as persimmons are normally not fed to livestock.
The toxicological profile of the active substance mancozeb was assessed in the review process under Directive 91/414/EEC (European Commission, 2009). The data were sufficient to derive toxicological reference values compiled in Table 2.
Ethylenethiourea (ETU) is a degradation product of mancozeb, maneb and metiram formed under high temperatures and having a higher toxicity than parent compounds. Toxicological references values are included in this application. However, ETU is not a concern for the intended use as persimmons are normally eaten raw.
The metabolism of mancozeb in primary crops was evaluated by the RMS in the framework of the evaluation of the active substance under Directive 91/414/EEC (Italy, 2000) in the fruit, root, cereals and pulses/oilseed crop groups. An overview of the available metabolism studies is presented in Table 3.
Metabolism studies indicate that mancozeb is extensively degraded in plants and the majority of the radioactivity is incorporated into naturally occurring biological molecules, such as simple and complex sugars (up to 41% of the TRR), starch (up to 27%), protein and amino acids (up to 45%), oil or lipid (up to 14%) and lignin (up to 23%). The level of the metabolite ETU was below the LOQ in all crop matrices and ETU was not detected as part of the metabolism study in any crop except in potato (0.0007 mg/kg). Considering the levels of ETU and that no other studies identified this metabolite, ETU was not included in the residue definition for unprocessed primary crops.
On the basis of these metabolism studies, the residue definition was proposed as mancozeb (expressed as CS2) for enforcement and risk assessment (EFSA, 2011). In Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 it was decided to establish a screening residue definition for dithiocarbamates, expressed as CS2, including maneb, mancozeb, metiram, propineb, thiram and ziram.
As the toxicological reference values are expressed as parent compound (mancozeb), a recalculation from CS2 to mancozeb using a conversion factor of 1.78 is needed to carry out the consumer risk assessment.
It is concluded that metabolism in all crop categories is similar and as persimmons are part of the fruit crop group, the residue definition for enforcement and risk assessment as mancozeb (expressed as CS2) is applicable.
In support of the MRL application, the applicant submitted four southern Europe (SEU) outdoor trials, all conducted in Spain in 2013 according to the proposed GAP (3 × 1,800 g/ha, PHI 100 days).
Samples were analysed for mancozeb as CS2. Residues levels in whole fruits were in the range of 0.05–0.07 mg/kg, resulting in a MRL proposal of 0.20 mg/kg using the OECD MRL calculator.
According to the EMS, analytical methods used to determine the residues of CS2 have proved to be fit for the purpose (Spain, 2015).
The results of the residue trials, the related risk assessment input values (highest residue, median residue) and the MRL proposal are summarised in Table 4.
The stability of mancozeb residues in plant matrices under storage conditions prior to analysis was assessed during the framework of the active substance evaluation under Directive 91/414/EEC (Italy, 2000). Residues of mancozeb were found to be stable at frozen storage conditions up to 24 months in high water and acid content matrices. As the trial samples were stored for a maximum period of ca. 40 days under conditions for which integrity of the samples was demonstrated, it is concluded that the residue data are valid with regard to storage stability.
EFSA concludes that data are sufficient to derive a MRL proposal of 0.2 mg/kg for the intended SEU use on persimmons.
Standard hydrolysis studies simulating the effect on the nature of mancozeb residues under processing conditions were assessed by the RMS in the framework of the evaluation process (Italy, 2000). The only degradation product of toxicological concern formed at elevated temperatures is ETU. Likewise, the toxicological reference values for this substance are summarised in Table 2.
Specific processing studies have been submitted under the current application and they are not considered necessary as persimmons are consumed as a fresh commodity.
As the proposed use of mancozeb is on permanent crops, the investigation of residues in rotational crops is not required and is therefore not considered in this reasoned opinion.
As persimmons are not normally used to feed livestock, the nature and magnitude of mancozeb residues in livestock is not assessed in the framework of this MRL application (European Commission, 1996).
The consumer risk assessment was performed with revision 2 of the EFSA PRIMo. This exposure assessment model contains the relevant European food consumption data for different subgroups of the EU population8 (EFSA, 2007).
To calculate the chronic exposure, EFSA used median residue value (STMR) derived from the residue trials conducted on persimmon (Table 4) multiplied by the molecular conversion factor 1.78 to express the residues as mancozeb equivalent, and the STMRs reported in a previous EFSA reasoned opinion (EFSA, 2011). For the remaining commodities of plant and animal origin, the existing MRLs as established in Regulation (EU) 2016/1 were used as input values. The estimated exposure was then compared with the toxicological reference values derived for mancozeb (Table 2).
Acute exposure assessment was performed only with regard to the commodity under consideration assuming the consumption of a large portion of the food item as reported in the national food surveys and that these items contained residues at the highest residue (HR) level as observed in supervised field trials (Table 4) expressed as mancozeb equivalent. A variability factor accounting for the inhomogeneous distribution on the individual items consumed was included in the calculation, when required (EFSA, 2007).
The input values used for the dietary exposure calculation are summarised in Table 5.
The estimated exposure was then compared with the toxicological reference values derived for mancozeb (Table 2). The results of the intake calculation using the EFSA PRIMo are a key supporting document and are made publicly available as a background document to this reasoned opinion.
A long‐term consumer intake concern has not been identified for any of the European diets incorporated in the EFSA PRIMo. The highest chronic intake was calculated to be 72% of the acceptable daily intake (ADI) (German, child). The contribution of residues in persimmons to the total consumer exposure accounted for less than 0.01% of the ADI (WHO Cluster B).
An acute consumer risk was not identified in relation to the MRL proposal. The highest acute consumer exposure was calculated to be 1% of the acute reference dose (ARfD) for persimmons.
EFSA concludes that the intended use of mancozeb on persimmons will not result in a consumer exposure exceeding the toxicological reference values and therefore is unlikely to pose a concern for public health.
The information submitted was sufficient to propose the MRL summarised in the table below:

Codea
CommodityExisting EU MRL (mg/kg)Proposed EU MRL (mg/kg)Comment/justification
Enforcement residue definition: Mancozeb, expressed as CS2
161060Persimmons0.05b
0.2Supported by SEU trials
EU: European Union; MRL: maximum residue level; CS2: carbon disulfide; SEU: southern Europe.
a
Commodity code number according to Annex I of Regulation (EC) No 396/2005.
b
Indicates that the MRL is set at the limit of analytical quantification (LOQ).



a.s.active substanceADIacceptable daily intakeARfDacute reference doseBBCHgrowth stages of mono‐ and dicotyledonous plantsbwbody weightCACCodex Alimentarius CommissionCCPRCodex Committee on Pesticide ResiduesCS2
carbon disulfideCXLCodex maximum residue limitDARdraft assessment reportDATdays after treatmentEMSevaluating Member StateETUethylenethioureaFAOFood and Agriculture Organization of the United NationsGAPgood agricultural practiceGC‐ECDgas chromatography with electron capture detectorGC‐FPDgas chromatography with flame photometric detectorHPLC‐MSDhigh performance liquid chromatography with mass spectrometry detectorHPLC‐UVDhigh performance liquid chromatography with ultra‐violet detectorHS‐GShead‐space gas chromatographyHRhighest residueISOInternational Organization for StandardizationIUPACInternational Union of Pure and Applied ChemistryJMPRJoint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide ResiduesLOQlimit of quantificationMRLmaximum residue levelMSMember StatesMWmolecular weightNEUnorthern EuropeOECDOrganisation for Economic Co‐operation and DevelopmentPHIpre‐harvest intervalPRIMo(EFSA) Pesticide Residues Intake ModelRArisk assessmentRMSrapporteur Member StateSANCODirectorate‐General for Health and ConsumersSEUsouthern EuropeSGwater‐soluble granuleSTMRsupervised trials median residueTRRtotal radioactive residueWHOWorld Health Organization


Crop and/or situationa
MS or NEU SEUF G or Ib
Pest or group of pests controlledc
FormulationApplicationApplication rate per treatmentPHI (days)k
Remarksl
Typed
,
e
Conc. a.s.h
Method kindf
,
g
Growth stage & seasoni
Number min‐maxj
Interval min‐maxg/hL min‐maxWater L/ha min‐maxg/ha min‐max
Persimmons

Diospyros kaki

SEUF

Circular leaf spot


Mycosphaerella nawae

SG750 g/LFoliar sprayBBCH 71–79 (April–June) and BBCH 91–95 (October–December)3–1801,0001,800100First and second application during vegetative and fruit development period (BBCH 71–79) and third application at harvest (BBCH 91–95)aFor crops, EU or other classifications, e.g. Codex, should be used; where relevant, the usage situation should be described (e.g. fumigation of a structure).bOutdoor or field use (F), glasshouse application (G) or indoor application (I).cFor example, biting and sucking insects, soil‐born insects, foliar fungi, weeds.dFor example, wettable powder (WP), water‐soluble granule (SG).eGCPF Codes – GIFAP Technical Monograph No 2, 1989.fMethod, e.g. high volume spraying, low volume spraying, spreading, dusting, drench.gKind, e.g. overall, broadcast, aerial spraying, row, individual plant, between the plants. Type of equipment used must be indicated.hg/kg or μg/L.iGrowth stage at last treatment (Meier U, 2001. Growth Stages of mono‐ and dicotyledonous plants. BBCH Monograph, 2nd Ed., Federal Biological Research Centre of Agriculture and Forestry, Braunschweig, Germany, 2001), including where relevant, information on season at time of application.jThe minimum and maximum number of application possible under practical conditions of use must be provided.kPHI – minimum pre‐harvest interval.lRemarks may include: extent of use/economic importance/restrictions.


Code/trivial nameChemical nameStructural formulaMancozebManganese ethylenebis (dithiocarbamate) (polymeric) complex with zinc salt (IUPAC name) MW: 271,3 g/mol


Mancozeb derivative metabolite (common for several dithiocarbamates)
Ethylenethiourea (ETU)Ethylenethiourea


