AbstractFor eyes with deficient capsular support, intraocular lens (IOL) implantation has long been a technical challenge. Recently, intrascleral fixation of the haptics of a three‐piece posterior chamber IOL has become a popular option. In this procedure, externalization of the leading haptic during IOL injection is a stressful step. We present a modified technique to improve the ease and safety of this step. Our modified technique involves IOL injection with a motorized injector with several important modifications described here. With these modifications, a surgeon can easily maintain the correct orientation of the IOL in a well‐controlled manner during IOL injection. The records of 13 patients who underwent this technique were retrospectively evaluated. Corrected‐distance visual acuity improved significantly after surgery (p < 0.05). No postoperative retinal detachment, endophthalmitis, IOL decentration, or vitreous hemorrhage was noted during the follow‐up period. In conclusion, the motorized injector‐assisted intrascleral IOL fixation technique is a safe and effective alternative to the conventional procedure. This technique makes the process of leading haptic externalization easier and more controllable.

Ideal modern cataract surgery includes removal of the crystalline lens and intraocular lens (IOL) placement completed as a single procedure, resulting in a postoperatively centered IOL supported by the capsular bag. In the absence of adequate capsular support, the IOL can be implanted into the anterior chamber (AC), fixated on the iris, or fixated in the posterior chamber using trans‐scleral sutures. However, each procedure has its limitations [1]. AC IOL can lead to corneal endothelium decompensation, chronic uveitis, and glaucoma, and trans‐scleral IOL fixation is associated with IOL decentration, tilt, and dislocation related to suture degradation [2].
Since the pioneer study in the development of the intrascleral fixation of the haptics of a three‐piece posterior chamber IOL by Scharioth and Pavlidis [3] in 2007, it has become a popular option for eyes with deficient capsular support [4]. This procedure avoids the disadvantage of suture degradation, has the advantage of posterior chamber placement and good IOL stability as well as less decentration or tilting postoperatively than other alternatives [5]. Many innovative variations [[4], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21]] have been reported to improve certain steps, including the introduction of fibrin glue for wound closure (glued IOL technique) [6], the handshake technique for intraocular manipulation of the haptics [10], and the no‐assistant technique [12] for trailing haptic externalization.
However, externalization of the leading haptic during IOL injection remains a stressful step. Here, we report a modified technique to tackle this important problem. Instead of using a manual injector, our technique utilizes a motorized injector, which improves the stability of the procedure. This enhanced functionality and ease of use allow much better control of this critical step.
This retrospective study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of National Cheng Kung University Hospital (B‐ER‐105‐096; Tainan, Taiwan). It was conducted in accordance with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from all the patients prior to the operation.
Patients who underwent motorized injector‐assisted intrascleral IOL fixation between January 1, 2015 and May 31, 2016 were included. Surgical indications included aphakia, crystalline lens, or IOL subluxation. Patients with preoperative retinal detachment were excluded. Each patient was followed up until July 31, 2016.
The decimal corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) was converted to the logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution (logMAR) for the statistical analyses. Preoperative and postoperative CDVA were analyzed using the Wilcoxon signed‐rank test. A p value < 0.05 was considered significant. All statistical analyses were performed using R software, version 3.3.1 (R Core Team (2016). R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).
Our technique was divided into five major parts: creation of the scleral flaps and infusion setup; preparation of the motorized injector; IOL injection with externalization of the leading haptic; externalization of the trailing haptic; and haptic tuck and fibrin glue‐assisted wound closure. The entire surgical procedure is demonstrated in the Video in the supplementary material.
Supplementary video related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kjms.2017.01.001
The following is the supplementary data related to this article:
A localized peritomy at the exit site of the IOL haptics was performed with judicious cauterization of the sclera. Two 2.5 mm × 2.5 mm partial thickness limbus‐based scleral flaps were created exactly 180° diagonally apart. Based on the procedure and the surgeon's preference, a pars plana infusion cannula or an anterior chamber (AC) maintainer cannula was fixated. For convenience, the infusion cannula was positioned in the inferonasal quadrant [6]. A 20‐gauge blade or 22‐gauge needle was used to create two pars plicata sclerotomies 1 mm from the limbus under the previously created scleral flaps. Anterior vitrectomy through the sclerotomies or corneal incisions was performed to release vitreous traction.
An Autosert IOL Injector (Alcon Laboratories, Fort Worth, TX, USA) was utilized as the motorized injecting system. The Monarch II C cartridge (Alcon Laboratories) was loaded with a standard foldable three‐piece IOL (Figure 1A). The cartridge was then installed into the IOL injector handpiece.
Before entering the preload step, the trailing haptic was kept away from the plunger tip with a hook or forceps (Figure 1B); otherwise, the haptic might have been trapped and damaged by the plunger during subsequent movement. Then, the preload step was initiated. The surgeon verified that the plunger automatically pushed the optic forward smoothly. The IOL became folded as it advanced along the tunnel inside the cartridge. When the IOL stopped in front of the nozzle, it was ready to be injected (Figure 1C). At this stage, the surgeon ensured proper configuration of the leading haptic. If the leading haptic was folded in the cartridge, it could be straightened out with an IOL dialer [22]. If the trailing haptic was damaged or disconnected from the optic, the plunger was retracted and the broken IOL replaced.
A 2.8‐mm corneal incision with a keratome was fashioned, followed by creation of a side port. The cartridge tip was inserted into the AC through the incision (Figure 1D); then a 23‐gauge glued IOL forceps (Epsilon, Chino, CA, USA) was introduced from the left sclerotomy. With supination movement of the right wrist, the cartridge was rotated clockwise, which allowed the leading haptic to point to the surgeon's left, namely the “Lucky 7” sign (Figure 1D) [22].
The injection procedure was then activated and controlled by a footswitch. After the leading haptic protruded out of the nozzle, the injection process was paused. The “Lucky 7” sign for the leading haptic was maintained throughout the injection. The leading haptic was engaged at the tip by the forceps while the optic was still inside the cartridge (Figure 2A). Then, the injection procedure was continued. Serial pronation movements of the right wrist might have been needed for the IOL to be correctly oriented. The forceps held the leading haptic until the optic left the nozzle. The leading haptic was then pulled out through the left sclerotomy, and the injector was withdrawn. The trailing haptic was kept outside the globe to prevent an IOL drop (Figure 2B).
IOL configuration was examined again. Ideally, the trailing haptic should have pointed to the surgeon's right, namely an “Upright C” sign (Figure 2B) [22]. If the IOL did not orient properly, an IOL flip could usually be achieved with careful manipulation of the haptics, as demonstrated in the video.
The surgeon used forceps in the left hand to hold the externalized leading haptic, and the trailing haptic was flexed through the incision into the globe with the right hand until it crossed the midline. The trailing haptic was subsequently externalized through the right sclerotomy using the handshake technique. This combined procedure has been called the no‐assistant technique (Figure 2C) [12]. Alternatively, the externalized leading haptic could be stabilized by an assistant to prevent it from slipping back.
The haptics were tucked into the limbus‐parallel intrascleral tunnels created with a 26‐gauge bent needle at the edge of the scleral flap, corresponding to the location of the sclerotomies. The IOL was centered by adjusting the length of the haptics tucked within the intrascleral tunnels. The infusion was stopped; air was injected into the AC, and the pupil was constricted. The scleral flaps and conjunctival peritomy were closed using fibrin glue (Tisseel VH; Baxter, Vienna, Austria; Figure 2D). Postoperatively, topical 0.5% levofloxacin and 1% prednisolone acetate were prescribed four times daily along with 0.3% tobramycin/0.1% dexamethasone ointment at bedtime for 4 weeks. Patients were instructed to wear an eye protector and avoid any mechanical trauma to the eye, such as ocular massage or rubbing.
Our technique was performed on 15 eyes of 15 patients. We excluded two patients who had retinal detachment preoperatively. This resulted in 13 patients in the cohort, seven men and six women. The median age was 63 years (interquartile range, 60–75 years; range, 28–83 years). Table 1 shows the clinical features and the intermediate postoperative outcomes. There were five cases of aphakia, five subluxated crystalline lenses, and three subluxated IOLs. The median follow‐up was 5 months (interquartile range, 4.0–7.0 months; range, 1–17 months).
The mean preoperative CDVA was 1.01 logMAR units, and the mean postoperative CDVA improved significantly to 0.63 logMAR units (p < 0.05). All IOLs were well centered with no tilt.
No intraoperative IOL drop was encountered. Postoperative complications included corneal edema unresponsive to conservative measures that persisted for > 3 months after surgery in two eyes (15.4%) and iris capture of the IOL with pigment dispersion in one eye (7.7%). For the two patients with prolonged corneal edema, decompensated corneal endothelium due to complicated cataract operations had been noted prior to the surgery.
In addition to prolonged edematous cornea, the reason for three eyes exhibiting postoperative suboptimal visual outcomes might be attributed to high corneal astigmatism. The cause of poor vision was unexplainable in one patient, who was lost to follow‐up after 1 month. No endophthalmitis, retinal detachment, IOL dislocation, or vitreous hemorrhage was noted during the follow‐up period.
By combining a motorized injecting system with glued IOL, our technique is aimed toward improving the ease of the leading haptic externalization during the IOL injection, which remains a critical procedural challenge.
Two types of manual injectors are commonly utilized for conventional glued IOL: screw‐type and plunger‐type injectors. Ideally, IOL injection with a consistent velocity prevents sudden uncontrolled entry of the IOL, so a screw‐type injector is favored. It requires both of the surgeon's hands (one for the injector and the other for the forceps), as well as an extra hand from an assistant to turn the screw on the screw‐type injector [[5], [10]]. An experienced assistant thus becomes mandatory for success. However, trained ophthalmic staff are not always available in every intraocular surgery. In addition, the tip of the cartridge is in the AC, and damage to the AC structure will ensue if the assistant has a shaky hand. Furthermore, an extra hand makes the surgical field even more crowded.
The other choice is the plunger‐type injector, in which the surgeon alone can accomplish this step [[5], [10]]. However, the possibility of sudden IOL movement increases, and so does the risk of IOL drop. In addition, the surgeon must manipulate both hands simultaneously in a relatively short period of time, which requires a longer learning curve.
A motorized injection system can overcome the problems of both types of manual injectors. Firstly, the system provides steady injection velocity. Secondly, it is activated by the surgeon's own foot and thus can replace an assistant's hand.
A personal e‐mail communication with Dr. Amar Agarwal MS, FRCS, FRCOphth in May 2016, addressed the fact that the Alcon cartridge tends to inject the three‐piece IOL upside down. This can be resolved by strict adherence to the correct configuration of the IOL, namely, the “Lucky 7” and the “Upright C” signs [22].
Through a well‐controlled IOL injection, which is the greatest advantage of our technique, the surgeon can easily achieve the proper IOL orientation during the entire injection process. Using our technique, the rate and tempo of injection can be adjusted based on the surgeon's needs, providing more time and space for delicate hand movements. Therefore, the ease and safety of this stressful step improves accordingly.
Our study had several limitations, including a small sample size, short follow‐up period, and lack of a control group. Further controlled studies with more cases and a longer follow‐up period are warranted to determine the long‐term outcomes of this technique.
While the long‐term outcomes are not available, there is a potential risk of leakage from the scleral wounds. To promote wound healing and to reduce the potential risk of infection, patients are advised to avoid mechanical trauma to the eye and to apply topical antibiotics regularly for 1 month.
After the scleral tuck‐in, the mechanical force provided by the scleral tunnel supports and stabilizes the haptics effectively. The utilization of fibrin glue almost immediately causes adhesion between the haptics and the sclera; the effect of which is expected to last for ∼8 days [23]. The fibroblast begins to form a scar during a physiological healing process ∼48 hours after surgery [24]. By the time the fibrin glue degrades, this wound healing mechanism is able to continue to augment the fixation effect of the haptics, which is theoretically a permanent effect.
In conclusion, a motorized IOL injector can be applied to glued IOL perfectly. This technique is easy, safe, and effective. It makes the process of leading haptic externalization more feasible, and it avoids complications associated with inadequate assistance.
We would like to offer our special thanks to Dr. Amar Agarwal for his valuable and constructive suggestions about this technique.