Abstract Alternaria toxins are secondary metabolites produced by fungi that can contaminate cereals, oilseeds, fruits and vegetables. The chronic dietary exposure to four individual Alternaria toxins was estimated using 15,563 analytical results/4,249 samples (3,648 on alternariol (AOH), 3,654 on alternariol monomethyl ether (AME), 4,168 on tenuazonic acid (TeA) and 4,093 on tentoxin (TEN)). Most of the analytical results were left‐censored data (92%), with only 1,290 quantified results (mainly on ‘Oilseeds’ and ‘Grain milling products’). The highest exposure to AOH was estimated in ‘Toddlers’, with the mean exposure between 3.8 and 71.6 ng/kg body weight (bw) per day (minimum lower bound–maximum upper bound, (LB–UB)) and the 95th percentile exposure between 11.4 and 270.5 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB). Overall, ‘Fruit and fruit products’ were the most important contributors to the dietary exposure to AOH. The highest exposure to AME was estimated in ‘Toddlers’, with mean exposure between 3.4 and 38.8 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB) and 95th percentile exposure between 10.3 and 97.3 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB). Overall, the main contributors to the dietary exposure to AME were ‘Vegetable oil’ and ‘Pome fruits’ (pears). The highest exposure to TeA was estimated in ‘Toddlers’ with mean exposure between 100 and 1,614 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB), and in ‘Infants’ for the 95th percentile exposure estimations (98–3,603 ng/kg bw per day, LB–UB). ‘Cereal‐based food for infants and young children’ was the main contributor in ‘Infants’ and ‘Toddlers’, and tomatoes and tomato‐based products in other age classes. The highest exposure to TEN was estimated in ‘Toddlers’, with the mean exposure between 1.6 and 33.4 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB), and the 95th percentile exposure around 55 ng/kg bw per day (UB) in different age classes. ‘Fruiting vegetables’ (tomatoes) were the major contributor to the dietary exposure to TEN. Although based on limited data, vegetarians seem to have higher dietary exposure to Alternaria toxins than the general population.

Alternaria species are fungi widely distributed in the soil as normal components of its microflora and are both saprophytes and plant pathogens. Alternaria species produce more than 70 secondary metabolites, some of them chemically characterised and reported to act as mycotoxins to humans and animals. Alternaria fungi are common plant pests in cereals, oilseeds, fruits and vegetables, among other foods, and the presence of Alternaria toxins in these commodities is widely reported in the literature.
In October 2011, the EFSA Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain (CONTAM Panel) published its risk assessment on Alternaria toxins in food and feed, which was the first risk assessment at the European or international level. At the time of the evaluation, the CONTAM Panel could only perform a risk assessment for four of the known Alternaria toxins, namely alternariol (AOH), alternariol monomethyl ether (AME), tenuazonic acid (TeA) and tentoxin (TEN). The reported data on Alternaria toxins in food were characterised by a high proportion of left‐censored data. The highest concentrations of the four toxins were reported for sunflower seeds, and the contribution to the dietary exposure to these toxins was mainly made by grain and grain‐based products, vegetables and vegetable products in particular tomato products, fruits and fruit products including fruit and vegetable juices, alcoholic beverages (wine and beer), oilseeds and vegetable oils (mainly sunflower seeds and sunflower oil). The CONTAM Panel also noted that there were very limited toxicity data available and, therefore, used the threshold of toxicological concern (TTC) approach to assess the relative level of concern of these mycotoxins for human health. The Panel concluded that for the genotoxic Alternaria toxins (AOH and AME) the estimated mean chronic dietary exposures at the upper bound (UB) and 95th percentile dietary exposures exceeded the TTC value (2.5 ng/kg body weight (bw) per day). This indicated a need for additional compound‐specific toxicity data. For the non‐genotoxic Alternaria toxins (TeA and TEN) (TTC value 1,500 ng/kg bw per day), the exposure estimates were unlikely to be a human health concern.
In the current scientific report and considering the four Alternaria toxins described in the terms of reference (AOH, AME, TeA and TEN), a total of 24,461 analytical results on food (7,916 food samples) were available: 6,662 (AOH), 6,567 (AME), 5,918 (TeA) and 5,314 (TEN). Following the evaluation of the submitted data, a final data set composed of 15,563 analytical results/4,249 samples was used to estimate dietary exposure: 3,648 on AOH, 3,654 on AME, 4,168 on TeA and 4,093 on TEN. Among them, 3,574 samples were analysed for the four Alternaria toxins covered in this scientific report, 47 for three of the Alternaria toxins, 498 for two and 130 only for one.
The highest number of data on Alternaria toxins was collected in 2014, with Germany reporting most of the samples (70%), followed by the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and Luxembourg. Most of the analytical data used to estimate dietary exposure were left‐censored data (92%). In total, there were 1,290 quantified results, with the majority reported for TeA (n = 822), followed by TEN (n = 196), AME (n = 163) and AOH (n = 109).
The highest mean levels of AOH were reported for some grains, in particular ‘Buckwheat’ (lower bound (LB) = 27.9 μg/kg, UB = 33.1 μg/kg) and ‘Oats’ (LB = 35.3 μg/kg, UB = 39.7 μg/kg). AOH was also present in diverse samples of tomato‐based products such as ‘Tomato puree’ (LB = 4.6 μg/kg, UB = 17.1 μg/kg), tomato sauce codified as ‘Vegetable sauce’ in Table 5 (LB = 4.3 μg/kg, UB = 17.4 μg/kg), and ‘Sun‐dried tomatoes’ (LB = 2.5 μg/kg, UB = 17.4 μg/kg), among others.
The reported levels of AME were lower than those reported for AOH, with few exceptions. The highest mean levels were found in samples of tree nuts and oil seeds, in particular ‘Chestnuts’ (LB = 16.8 μg/kg, UB = 17.5 μg/kg) and ‘Sesame seeds’ (LB = 11.3 μg/kg, UB = 11.8 μg/kg).
The levels of TeA were much higher than those reported for any other Alternaria toxin. TeA was reported in samples of tomatoes and several tomato‐based products. Relatively high levels were reported for 30 samples of tomato soup (dried soup), codified as ‘Vegetable/herb soup’, with mean concentration of 351.2 μg/kg (LB = UB). Other tomato‐based products with high levels of TeA were ‘Sun‐dried tomatoes’ (LB = 226 μg/kg, UB = 233 μg/kg) and ‘Tomato purée’ (LB = 211 μg/kg, UB = 212 μg/kg). TeA was also quantified in tomato sauce (codified as ‘Vegetable sauce’), ‘Tomato ketchup’ and ‘Tomato juice’, as well as in fresh tomatoes (LB = 39 μg/kg, UB = 54 μg/kg). Diverse samples of ‘Cereals with an added high protein food which are or have to be reconstituted with water or other protein‐free liquid’ (n = 64) were also reported to the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) with TeA average values of 496–497 μg/kg (LB–UB) with more than 90% of the samples being quantified.
In general, the levels of TEN in the reported food samples were the lowest among the four Alternaria toxins covered in this scientific report. The highest levels were found in samples of ‘Sunflower seeds’ (LB = 79 μg/kg, UB = 82 μg/kg), with almost half of the samples quantified.
The highest mean and 95th percentile dietary exposure to AOH was estimated in ‘Toddlers’ and ‘Other children’. For ‘Toddlers’, the mean exposure ranged between 3.8 and 71.6 ng/kg body weight (bw) per day (lowest LB–highest UB (LB–UB)) and the 95th percentile dietary exposure between 11.4 and 270.5 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB). For ‘Other children’, the mean dietary exposure varied between 2.0 and 54.4 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB) and the 95th percentile exposure between 9.1 and 218.9 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB). Overall, ‘Fruit and fruit products’ were the most important contributors to the dietary exposure to AOH.
Dietary exposure to AME was lower than that estimated to AOH. As observed for AOH, the highest dietary exposure to AME was estimated in ‘Toddlers’ and ‘Other children’. For ‘Toddlers’, the mean exposure ranged between 3.4 and 38.8 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB) and the 95th percentile dietary exposure between 10.3 and 97.3 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB). For ‘Other children’, the mean dietary exposure varied between 1.6 and 34.4 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB) and the 95th percentile exposure between 6.5 and 89.9 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB). Overall, the main contributors to the exposure to AME were ‘Vegetable oil’ and ‘Pome fruits’ (pears).
Dietary exposure to TeA was by far the highest among the different Alternaria toxins. The highest mean dietary exposure to TeA was estimated in ‘Toddlers’ and ‘Infants’. For ‘Toddlers’, the mean exposure ranged between 100 and 1,614 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB), and for ‘Infants’, between 37 and 1,490 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB). In the highly exposed population (95th percentile), the highest estimates were in ‘Infants’ (98–3,603 ng/kg bw per day, LB–UB), also followed by ‘Toddlers’ (209–1,216 ng/kg bw per day, LB–UB). Overall, the main contributor to the high dietary exposure to TeA in ‘Infants’ was ‘Cereal‐based food for infants and young children’. In other age classes, tomatoes and tomato‐based products were the most important contributors.
The highest mean exposure to TEN was estimated in ‘Toddlers’ and ‘Other children’. For ‘Toddlers’, the mean exposure ranged between 1.6 and 33.4 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB), and for ‘Other children’ between 0.7 and 30.1 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB). Regarding the 95th percentile exposure, the maximum estimates (UB) for ‘Toddlers’, ‘Other children’ and ‘Adolescents’ were around 55 ng/kg bw per day. The major contributor to the dietary exposure to TEN across all age classes was ‘Tomatoes’, within the food group ‘Fruiting vegetables’, with a maximum contribution of 93% to the total exposure (median = 60%).
Although based on limited data, vegetarians seem to have higher dietary exposure to the different Alternaria toxins than the general population. Dietary exposure estimations were surrounded by uncertainty, mainly referring to the representativity of the food samples (70% of the analytical data were produced from food samples collected in just one Member state (MS)) and the large proportion of left‐censored (92%). Likewise, uncertainty was identified when linking occurrence and consumption data of very specific tomato‐based products (e.g. tomato sauce, tomato soup).
As compared to the 2011 EFSA opinion, for AOH similar or somewhat lower, dietary exposures were observed at the LB estimations, although the UB estimations were much lower. For AME, higher values are observed in both the LB and UB exposure estimation, more evident in the latter due to the current availability of occurrence data staple foods (e.g. ‘Bread and rolls’, ‘Fine bakery wares’), with relatively high differences between the LB–UB occurrence values. Regarding the dietary exposure to TeA and TEN, overall, higher exposure estimates were observed (LB and UB) as compared to the 2011 EFSA opinion. This is explained to a great extent by the higher amount of occurrence data available (better food coverage), and by the higher levels reported for some food commodities, some of them major contributors to the exposure. The main food contributors to the dietary exposure to the different Alternaria toxins were similar to those described in the 2011 EFSA scientific opinion; the main difference regards the marked increase in the contribution of tomatoes and tomato‐based products, in particular for the exposure to TeA.
Efforts should continue to generate more analytical data on Alternaria toxins in relevant food commodities (e.g. fruit and fruit products, tomatoes and tomato‐based products, cereal‐based food for infants and young children, among others), using sensitive analytical methods allowing the reduction in the uncertainty associated to the exposure to the different Alternaria toxins.
Alternaria species are fungi widely distributed in the soil as normal components of its microflora and are both saprophytes and plant pathogens. Alternaria species produce more than 70 secondary metabolites, some of them chemically characterised and reported to act as mycotoxins to humans and animals. Among them, alternariol (AOH), alternariol monomethyl ether (AME), tenuazonic acid (TeA), iso‐TeA, altertoxins (ATX), tentoxin (TEN), altenuene (ALT) and Alternaria alternata f. sp. lycopersici toxins (AAL‐toxins) were considered by the EFSA Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain (CONTAM Panel) in its risk assessment (EFSA CONTAM Panel, 2011). These toxins have typically been divided into five different classes based on their chemical structures: dibenzo‐α‐pyrones which include AOH, AME, ALT;TeA and iso‐TeA;perylene quinones which include altertoxins I, II and III (ATX‐I, ATX‐II and ATX‐III), and stemphyltoxin III;AAL‐toxins, abbreviation for A. alternata f. sp. lycopersici toxins. AAL‐toxins include 2 groups, AAL‐TA and AAL‐TB. AAL‐TA consists of two esters (C13 or C14) of 1,2,3‐propane‐tricarboxylic acid and 1 amino‐11,15 dimethylheptadeca‐2,4,5,13,14 pentol. AAL‐TB consists of two esters at C13 or C14 of 1,2,3 propane‐tricarboxylic acid and 1‐amino‐11,15‐dimethylheptadeca‐2,4,13,14‐tetrol;miscellaneous structures such as tentoxin (TEN) (a cyclic tetrapeptide).
These mycotoxins are known to be produced by various Alternaria fungi, common plant pests in cereals, oilseeds, fruits and vegetables. The most prevalent Alternaria fungi is Alternaria alternata which is also the most important mycotoxin‐producing fungus. Alternaria fungi do not only contaminate harvests but they can also spoil foods in the fridge‐temperatures.
In October 2011, the CONTAM Panel published its risk assessment on Alternaria toxins in food and feed, which was the first risk assessment at the European or international level (EFSA CONTAM Panel, 2011). At the time of the evaluation, the CONTAM Panel could only do a risk assessment for four of the known Alternaria toxins, namely AOH, AME, TeA and TEN; the chemical structures of these four toxins are shown in Figure 1. Occurrence values for certain grains and grain‐based products, tomato and tomato‐based products, sunflower seeds and sunflower oil, fruits and fruit products including fruit juices, and in beer and wine were used for the risk assessment (EFSA CONTAM Panel, 2011). The highest concentrations of the four toxins were reported for sunflower seeds, and the contribution to the dietary exposure to these toxins was mainly from grain and grain‐based products, vegetables and vegetable products. The CONTAM Panel noted that there was little information on the influence of processing on these toxins, but there were indications that their concentrations may increase in favourable conditions, and that they may be chemically stable during food processing (EFSA CONTAM Panel, 2011).
The CONTAM Panel also noted that there was very limited toxicity data available and, therefore, used the threshold of toxicological concern (TTC) approach to assess the relative level of concern of these mycotoxins for human health. The Panel concluded that for the genotoxic Alternaria toxins (AOH and AME) the estimated mean chronic dietary exposures at the upper bound and 95th percentile dietary exposures exceeded the TTC value (2.5 ng/kg body weight (bw) per day). This indicated a need for additional compound‐specific toxicity data. For the non‐genotoxic Alternaria toxins (TeA and TEN), with a TTC value of 1,500 ng/kg bw per day, the exposure estimates were unlikely to be a human health concern.
The CONTAM Panel made several recommendations, and one of them led to a research project called ‘Combined toxicokinetic and in vivo genotoxicity study on Alternaria toxins’ (Schuchardt et al., 2014). The CONTAM Panel discussed the outcome of this project in November 2014 and concluded that the results did not bring full certainty nor did they increase concern regarding the potential in vivo genotoxicity of Alternaria toxins. Therefore, at the time, the CONTAM Panel did not see the need to revisit its 2011 risk assessment.
Currently, there are no regulations on Alternaria toxins in food and feed in Europe.
Background as provided by the European Commission
Following the outcome of EFSA's scientific opinion on Alternaria toxins in food and feed in 20111 and the availability of new occurrence data on the presence of Alternaria toxins in food, the Commission is considering the possible setting of maximum levels for certain Alternaria toxins in food. Since 2011, more occurrence data on Alternaria toxins have become available. It would therefore be appropriate, also taking into account the updated comprehensive food consumption database, to have an updated exposure assessment to the following Alternaria toxins individually: alternariol (AOH), alternariol monomethyl ether (AME), tenuazonic acid (TeA) and tentoxin (TEN).
Terms of Reference
In accordance with Art. 31 (1) of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002, the Commission asks the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) for a dietary exposure assessment to alternariol (AOH), alternariol monomethyl ether (AME), tenuazonic acid (TeA) and tentoxin (TEN) individually, hereby taking into account: occurrence data available in the EFSA database;the updated comprehensive food consumption database.
To complement the analytical data already contained in the EFSA database, the EFSA Evidence Management Unit (DATA unit) published an ad hoc call for data in February 2016.2 European national food authorities and similar bodies, research institutes, academia, and food business operators were invited to submit analytical data on Alternaria toxins in food. The data were submitted to EFSA following the EFSA Guidance on Standard Sample Description for Food and Feed (EFSA, 2010a); occurrence data were managed following the EFSA standard operating procedures (SOPs) on ‘Data collection and validation’ and on ‘Data analysis of food consumption and occurrence data’.
At the moment of the preparation of this scientific report (September 2016), a total of 34,072 analytical results of different toxins produced by Alternaria in food were available in the EFSA chemical occurrence database. Considering the four Alternaria toxins described in the terms of reference (alternariol (AOH), alternariol monomethyl ether (AME), tenuazonic acid (TeA) and tentoxin (TEN)), a total of 24,461 analytical results on food were available: 6,662 (AOH), 6,567 (AME), 5,918 (TeA) and 5,314 (TEN).
Following the EFSA SOP on ‘Data analysis of food consumption and occurrence data’ to guarantee an appropriate quality of the data used in the exposure assessment, the initial data set was carefully evaluated applying several data cleaning and validation steps. Special attention was paid to different data elements such as ‘Analytical method’, ‘Reporting unit’, ‘Expression of results’ and the codification of the different food samples under the FoodEx classification. The outcome of the data analysis is shown in Section 3.
The left‐censored data were treated by the substitution method as recommended in the ‘Principles and Methods for the Risk Assessment of Chemicals in Food’ (WHO/IPCS, 2009). The same method is indicated in the EFSA scientific report ‘Management of left‐censored data in dietary exposure assessment of chemical substances’ (EFSA, 2010b) as an option in the treatment of left‐censored data. The guidance suggests that the lower bound (LB) and upper bound (UB) approach should be used for chemicals likely to be present in the food (e.g. naturally occurring contaminants, nutrients and mycotoxins). At the LB, results below the limit of quantification (LOQ) and the limit of detection (LOD) were replaced by zero; at the UB, the results below the LOD were replaced by the LOD and those below the LOQ were replaced by the value reported as LOQ. Additionally, as a point estimate between the two extremes, the middle bound (MB) scenario was calculated by assigning a value of LOD/2 or LOQ/2 to the left‐censored data.
The EFSA Comprehensive European Food Consumption Database (Comprehensive Database) provides a compilation of existing national information on food consumption at the individual level. It was first built in 2010 (EFSA, 2011a; Huybrechts et al., 2011; Merten et al., 2011). Details on how the Comprehensive Database is used are published in the Guidance of EFSA (EFSA, 2011a). The latest version of the Comprehensive Database3 contains results from a total of 51 different dietary surveys carried out in 23 different MSs covering 94,532 individuals.
Within the dietary surveys, subjects are classified in different age classes as described in Table 1; two additional surveys provided information on specific population groups: ‘Pregnant women’ (Latvia) and ‘Lactating women’ (Greece).
Overall, the food consumption data in the Comprehensive Database are the most complete and detailed data currently available at the European Union (EU) level. Consumption data were collected using single or repeated 24‐ or 48‐h dietary recalls, and dietary records covering from 3 to 7 days per subject. Owing to the differences in the methods used for data collection, direct country‐to‐country comparisons can be misleading.
Consumption and occurrence data were classified according to the FoodEx classification system (EFSA, 2011b). The FoodEx was developed by EFSA in 2009 with the objective of simplifying the linkage between occurrence and food consumption data when assessing the exposure to food‐borne hazards. It contains 20 main food groups at the first level, which are further divided into subgroups with 140 items at the second level, 1,261 items at the third level and reaching about 1,800 endpoints (food names or generic food names) at the fourth level.
Based on the outcome of the 2011 EFSA Scientific opinion on Alternaria toxins (EFSA CONTAM Panel, 2011), only chronic exposure was assessed; the dietary exposure was estimated for each of the four Alternaria toxins separately.
As suggested by the EFSA Working Group on Food Consumption and Exposure, the dietary surveys with only 1 day per subject were not considered for chronic exposure as they are not adequate to assess repeated exposure (EFSA, 2011a). Similarly, subjects who participated only 1 day in the dietary surveys, when the protocol prescribed more reporting days per individual, were also excluded for the chronic exposure assessment. Thus, for chronic exposure assessment, food consumption data were used from 35 different and most recent dietary surveys carried out in 19 different European countries present in the latest version of the Comprehensive Database. The number of subjects included in the chronic exposure assessment is described in Appendix A.
For calculating chronic dietary exposure to individual Alternaria toxins, food consumption and body weight data at the individual level were accessed in the Comprehensive Database. Occurrence data and consumption data were linked at the lowest FoodEx level possible. In addition, the different food commodities were grouped within each food category to better explain their contribution to the total dietary exposure to the individual Alternaria toxins. Exposure estimates were calculated for each dietary survey and age class. The mean and the high (95th percentile) chronic dietary exposures to each of the four Alternaria toxins considered in this report were calculated by combining the mean occurrence values of the toxins with the average daily consumption for each food at the individual level in each dietary survey.
All analyses were run using the SAS Statistical Software (SAS enterprise guide 5.1).
The 24,461 analytical results (7,916 food samples) on the four Alternaria toxins were assessed before they were used to estimate the dietary exposure, including a comprehensive check of the reported food classification, units and expression of results (e.g. fresh weight/dry weight), among other parameters. This data set includes 9,009 analytical results from the German Federal Office of Consumer Protection and Food Safety (BVL) received following the ad hoc call for data issued in February 2016. Food samples were collected in Austria, the Czech Republic, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain, the United Kingdom, with a few of them reported as collected in ‘European union’ without further details. Most of the data came from national competent authorities (92%), with few data reported by academia (2%), and old data (1993–2009) collected from the literature that were used in the 2011 EFSA Scientific opinion.
As a first step, the analytical results collected before 2010 were excluded as they may not represent the current levels on Alternaria toxins in food (6,018 analytical results/2,936 samples) and, therefore, may lead to the biased exposure estimations. A total of 929 analytical results/269 samples reported as ‘Grains as crops’, which final use could be either food or feed, were also excluded. Attention was also paid to identify samples reported as ‘Suspect samples’ under the Standard Sample Description (SSD) data element ‘Sampling strategy’; these samples were excluded from the final data set since it was considered that they do not represent random sampling and they could bias the exposure estimates (n = 169 analytical results/44 samples). To minimise the impact of left‐censored data and methods with relatively low sensitivity on the UB scenario, the analytical data were carefully evaluated. The EFSA internal guidance on the application of LOD/LOQ cut‐offs was followed and, with the support of current literature, it was decided to exclude those samples reporting analytical methods with a LOQ equal to or higher than 100 μg/kg for each of the toxins. As a result, 891 samples were excluded, each of them reporting analytical data on both AOH and AME (1,782 analytical results, only two quantified).
The final data set on Alternaria toxins was composed of 15,563 analytical results/4,249 samples: 3,648 on AOH, 3,654 on AME, 4,168 on TeA and 4,093 on TEN. Among the samples contained in the final data set, 3,574 were analysed for the four Alternaria toxins covered in this scientific report, 47 for three of them, 498 for two and 130 for only one. All analytical results were expressed as whole weight.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of the different analytical results in the final data set per sampling year; the highest number of data on Alternaria toxins was collected in 2014. Among the sampling countries, only four MSs reported data, with most data sent by Germany, followed by the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and Luxembourg (Figure 3).
Table 2 shows the distribution of the analytical results across the different food groups, following the FoodEx classification (level 1) and grouped by each individual Alternaria toxin. It can be seen that the number of left‐censored data in the final data set was very high (overall 92%), with left‐censored data representing in many food groups more than 90% of the total data. In total, there were 1,290 quantified results, with the majority reported for TeA (n = 822), followed by TEN (n = 196), AME (n = 163) and AOH (n = 109). Four food groups (FoodEx level 1) were mainly represented: ‘Grains and grain‐based products’, with up to 1,973 results reported for TeA, ‘Legumes, nuts and oilseeds’ with up to 699 results for AME, ‘Fruit and fruit products’ with up to 340 results for AOH/TeA/TEN, and ‘Fruit and vegetable juices’ with 399 results reported for each of the four Alternaria toxins (Table 2).
For most of the analytical data reported on Alternaria toxins, information on the analytical method was absent (~ 70%). Among the samples that reported this information, all were analysed using liquid chromatography (LC) with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) as the detection method. Table 3 shows the range of LOQs reported in the final data set divided by different food groups (FoodEx level 1) and each individual Alternaria toxin. The reported LOQs varied with the toxin, the food group and the laboratory. The highest sensitivity was reported for the analysis of TeA in ‘Food for infants and young children’, with a LOQ of 0.07 μg/kg. For AOH reported, LOQs varied between 2 and 50 μg/kg; for AME, from 0.4 to 50 μg/kg; for TeA, from 0.07 to 66 μg/kg; and for TEN, from 0.5 to 25 μg/kg.
A large number of analytical results (9,222) were reported as below the LOD. Therefore, the reported LODs are of particular importance in the data set of Alternaria toxins. Table 4 shows the range of LODs reported in the final data set divided by different food groups (FoodEx level 1) and each individual Alternaria toxin.
In the next sections, the occurrence levels for the individual Alternaria toxins are shown at detailed food groups (FoodEx level 2 and 3); since the number of samples in the different groups was in some cases rather limited and, above all, the number of left‐censored data was very high, the mean concentration values should be cautiously interpreted.
Food groups at the FoodEx level 1 and the FoodEx level 2 where all analytical results were reported as left‐censored were excluded before estimating exposure. This approach was followed to minimise the impact of left‐censored data and the consequent bias on the UB exposure estimations. Then, food groups at the FoodEx level 3 were considered separately when different levels of Alternaria toxins were reported among them; otherwise, they were all grouped at the FoodEx level 2. Finally, when appropriate, food groups at the FoodEx level 2 were created by grouping all food subgroups to allow the linking with consumption data reported at lower level of detail (FoodEx level 2).
A total of 3,648 food samples analysed for the presence of AOH were available in the final data set (see Appendix B). The vast majority of the analytical results received for AOH were left‐censored data; only 109 results reported the presence of AOH in the different food samples analysed. Main groups with the highest number of quantified results were ‘Oilseeds’ (n = 17) and ‘Grains for human consumption’ (n = 14).
Table 5 shows the food samples and their mean concentrations used to estimate the dietary exposure once the food groups with all left‐censored data were excluded. Among others, food groups excluded were ‘Bread and rolls’ (n = 273), ‘Pasta (Raw)’ (n = 141), both at the FoodEx level 2, and ‘Apple juice’ (n = 159) at the FoodEx level 3.
Apart from one sample of ‘Carob fruit’ (180 μg/kg), the highest mean levels of AOH were reported for some grains, in particular ‘Buckwheat’ (LB = 27.9 μg/kg, UB = 33.1 μg/kg) and ‘Oats’ (LB = 35.3 μg/kg, UB = 39.7 μg/kg). No levels of AOH were quantified in near all the samples of processed grain‐based products (n = 1286), neither in ‘Cereal‐based food for infants and young children’ (n = 9). The few quantified samples (five in total) were reported in unspecified ‘Grain milling products’, in ‘Wheat bran’ and in ‘Cereal flakes’, with concentrations that ranged between 12.9 μg/kg in the flakes and 20 μg/kg in the unspecified ‘Grain milling products’. Although levels of AOH have been also reported in beer (Prelle et al., 2013), this toxin was not quantified in any of the reported samples of beer (n = 64).
Similarly, relatively high mean levels of AOH were found in samples of ‘Chestnuts’ (LB = 43.9 μg/kg, UB = 44.5 μg/kg) and ‘Sunflower seeds’ (LB = 22.4 μg/kg, UB = 29.1 μg/kg). AOH was also present in diverse samples of tomato‐based products such as ‘Tomato puree’ (LB = 4.6 μg/kg, UB = 17.1 μg/kg), tomato sauce codified as ‘Vegetable sauce’ in Table 5 (LB = 4.3 μg/kg, UB = 17.4 μg/kg), and ‘Sun‐dried tomatoes’ (LB = 2.5 μg/kg, UB = 17.4 μg/kg), among others. Tomatoes and many other soft‐skinned vegetables and fruits can easily be infected by fungi, among them Alternaria spp., that have been reported to be the most common fungi infecting tomatoes (Ackermann et al., 2011; Noser et al., 2011). A total of 12 samples of fresh tomatoes were reported to EFSA, all of them as non‐quantified. In alignment with data reported in the literature (Asam et al., 2011), AOH was quantified in diverse fruit and fruit products, with the highest values reported for ‘Figs’ (LB = 5.2 μg/kg, UB = 12.4 μg/kg) and ‘Pears’ (LB = 3.6 μg/kg, UB = 7.8 μg/kg). AOH was also reported in ‘Grape juice’ (LB = 0.5 μg/kg, UB = 9.2 μg/kg) and ‘Pear juice’ (LB = 0.4 μg/kg, UB = 2.5 μg/kg). No levels of AOH were reported in any of the samples of ‘Apple juice’ reported (n = 159), although in the past several studies have reported the presence of Alternaria toxins in apple and apple products (Asam et al., 2009; Ackermann et al., 2011).
A total of 3,654 food samples analysed for the presence of AME were available in the final data set (see Appendix B.2). Similar to AOH, only few samples reported quantified values for AME; in total, AME was quantified in only 163 food samples. In addition to samples of ‘Grains for human consumption’ (n = 20), the main quantified samples referred to ‘Oilseeds’ (n = 48) and ‘Vegetable oils’ (n = 34).
Table 6 shows the food samples and their mean concentrations used to estimate dietary exposure once the food groups with all left‐censored data were excluded. Among others, food groups excluded were ‘Pasta (Raw)’ (n = 141), ‘Legumes, beans, dried’ (n = 133) and ‘Stone fruits’ (n = 72), all three at the FoodEx level 2, and ‘Apple juice’ (n = 146) at the FoodEx level 3.
Overall, the reported levels of AME were lower than those reported for AOH with few exceptions, such as levels reported for ‘Olive oil’ (LB = 4.5 μg/kg, UB = 4.6 μg/kg) and ‘Sunflower oil’ (LB = 2.9 μg/kg, UB =3.9 μg/kg). Among the grains for human consumption, ‘Buckwheat’ (LB = 10.1 μg/kg, UB = 11.0 μg/kg) and ‘Oats’ (LB = 6.4 μg/kg, UB = 7.1 μg/kg) contained the highest mean concentrations. In few samples of processed grain‐based products, AME was quantified, in particular in ‘Bread and rolls’ where four samples reported levels between 2.1 and 3.8 μg/kg. However, the quantified samples represented only 1% of all samples of processed grain‐based products; no levels were quantified in samples of ‘Cereal‐based food for infants and young children’ (n = 9). As in the samples of beer analysed for AOH, AME was not quantified (n = 64).
The highest mean levels of AME among the reported samples were found in samples of tree nuts and oil seeds, in particular ‘Chestnuts’ (LB = 16.8 μg/kg, UB = 17.5 μg/kg) and ‘Sesame seeds’ (LB = 11.3 μg/kg, UB = 11.8 μg/kg). It is noteworthy to mention that in almost 70% of the samples of ‘Sesame seeds’ AME was quantified. AME was also quantified in a few samples of tomato‐based products, although at the lower levels than those reported for AOH.
A total of 4,168 food samples analysed for the presence of TeA were available in the final data set (see Appendix B.3). As compared to the other Alternaria toxins, a relatively high number of samples reported quantified levels of TeA, specifically 822 samples (20%). They were mainly samples of grains and grain milling products (n = 114), but also samples of tomato‐based products (n = 79) and samples of ‘Cereal‐based food for infants and young children’ (n = 59), among others. Table 7 shows the food samples and their mean concentrations used to estimate dietary exposure once the food groups with all left‐censored data were excluded. Among others, food groups excluded were ‘Starchy roots and tubers’ (n = 26) at the FoodEx level 1, and ‘Legumes, beans, dried’ (n = 151) at the FoodEx level 2.
In addition to the higher number of quantified samples, the levels of TeA were also much higher than those reported for any other Alternaria toxin. The highest mean values were reported for samples of ‘Paprika, powder’ (LB = 8,801 μg/kg, UB = 8,802 μg/kg) and in four samples of ‘Mulberries’ (LB = UB = 5,742 μg/kg); these levels of TeA may indicate that the analyses were carried out in moulded foods severely contaminated with Alternaria. No levels of the other Alternaria toxins (AOH, AME and TEN) were found in the four samples of berries.
Other foods, which were mentioned before in relation with their levels of AOH and AME, also contained relatively high mean levels of TeA: ‘Chestnuts’ (LB = 793 μg/kg, UB = 794 μg/kg) and ‘Sunflower seeds’ (LB = 563 μg/kg, UB = 570 μg/kg), among others.
TeA was also reported in samples of tomatoes and diverse tomato‐based products. The relatively high levels were reported for 30 samples of tomato soup (dried soup), codified as ‘Vegetable/herb soup’, with the mean concentration of 351.2 μg/kg (LB = UB). Other tomato‐based products with high levels of TeA were ‘Sun‐dried tomatoes’ (LB = 226 μg/kg, UB = 233 μg/kg) and ‘Tomato purée’ (LB = 211 μg/kg, UB = 212 μg/kg). TeA was also quantified in tomato sauce (codified as ‘Vegetable sauce’), ‘Tomato ketchup’ and ‘Tomato juice’ (Table 7), as well as in fresh tomatoes (LB = 39 μg/kg, UB = 54 μg/kg). Numerous studies have been recently published reporting the presence of TeA in tomatoes and/or tomato‐based products in some cases with concentrations close to 5,000 μg/kg (Asam et al., 2011; Lohrey et al., 2013; Van de Perre et al., 2014; López et al., 2016). Tomatoes and tomato‐based products seem to be highly susceptible to fungal infestation due to their soft epidermis (Moss, 1984), with TeA usually being the Alternaria toxins found at the highest levels. The 2011 EFSA opinion already reported the presence of TeA in several tomato‐based products, and TeA as the toxin present at the highest levels among the four Alternaria toxins assessed (EFSA CONTAM Panel, 2011).
It is important to mention the relatively high mean levels of TeA reported for samples of ‘Cereal‐based food for infants and young children’. A total of 64 samples of ‘Cereals with an added high protein food which are or have to be reconstituted with water or other protein‐free liquid’ were reported to EFSA with average values of 496–497 μg/kg (LB–UB) with more than 90% of the samples being quantified. Additional information provided at the moment of reporting the data shows that, in most of the cases, they refer to gluten‐free samples. Some recent studies have been published alerting on the high levels of TeA in cereal‐based infant food, indicating that the origin of the problem could be in the presence sorghum/millet as main ingredient (Asam and Rychlik, 2013; Asam et al., 2013). These studies also identified fungi other than Alternaria species producing TeA, such as Pyricularia oryzae and Phoma sorghina. Analytical data on TeA in millet grains reported to EFSA show that they contain by far the highest mean concentration (LB = 156 μg/kg, UB = 169 μg/kg) among the different grains for human consumption (Table 7).
A total of 4,093 food samples analysed for the presence of TEN were available in the final data set (see Appendix B.4). Around 5% of the total samples (196) reported levels of TEN. The highest number of quantified samples was for ‘Oilseeds’ (n = 55), ‘Grains for human consumption’ (n = 35), ‘Grain milling products’ (n = 37), and ‘Tree nuts’ (n = 31).
Table 8 shows the food samples and their mean concentrations used to estimate dietary exposure once the food groups with all left‐censored data were excluded. Among others, main food groups excluded were ‘Alcoholic beverages’ (n = 191) at the FoodEx level 1, ‘Bread and rolls’ (n = 274), ‘Fine bakery wares’ (n = 115) and ‘Wine’ (n = 87) at the FoodEx level 2, and ‘Apple juice’ (n = 159) at the FoodEx level 3.
Overall, the levels of TEN in the reported food samples were the lowest among the four Alternaria toxins covered in this scientific report. The highest mean levels were found in samples of ‘Sunflower seeds’ (LB = 79 μg/kg, UB = 82 μg/kg), with almost half of the samples quantified.
Based on the outcome of the 2011 EFSA Scientific opinion on Alternaria toxins (EFSA CONTAM Panel, 2011), only chronic exposure was assessed; the dietary exposure was estimated for each individual Alternaria toxin separately (AOH, AME, TeA and TEN) in 35 dietary surveys from 19 different European countries. Consumption data were grouped at the same level as described for the occurrence data (Food link).
Conversion factors were used when needed to match the occurrence values reported in dry samples with their respective liquid consumption amounts (or vice versa). This occurs for the reported samples of dried tomato soup (codified as ‘Vegetable soup’) where the reported concentrations were divided by a factor of 10 before being linked with consumption. Likewise, some of the eating occasions of ‘Cereal‐based food for infants and young children’ reported as consumed were divided either by a factor of 7 or 4 depending on whether they refer to ‘Simple cereals which are or have to be reconstituted with milk or other appropriate nutritious liquids’ or to ‘Cereals with an added high protein food which are or have to be reconstituted with water or other protein‐free liquid’, respectively.
Looking at the food contributors, rather big variation was observed when considering the LB–UB exposure estimations due to the high number of left‐censored data and their evident influence on the occurrence values derived using the substitution method. Due to this fact, the lower bound (LB) estimations were mainly used to compare the contribution of the different food groups to the total exposure, although in some cases also the upper bound (UB) estimations were considered.
Since the number of quantified samples in particular food subgroups was very limited, the mean concentration values as well as some of the food contributors to the exposure should be interpreted with caution.
Table 9 shows summary statistics for the mean and 95th percentile chronic dietary exposure to AOH across different age classes. The detailed mean and 95th percentile dietary exposure estimates calculated for each of the 35 dietary surveys are presented in Appendix C.1.
The highest mean and 95th percentile dietary exposure to AOH was estimated in ‘Toddlers’ and ‘Other children’ (Table 9). For ‘Toddlers’, the mean exposure ranged between 3.8 and 71.6 ng/kg bw per day (minimum LB–maximum UB) and the 95th percentile dietary exposure between 11.4 and 270.5 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB). For ‘Other children’, the mean dietary exposure varied between 2.0 and 54.4 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB) and the 95th percentile exposure between 9.1 and 218.9 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB).
Overall, ‘Fruit and fruit products’ were the most important contributors to the dietary exposure to AOH. Within this food group and among the most exposed age classes, ‘Pome fruits’, in particular pears, had the highest contribution to the total exposure providing up to 84% of the total exposure (LB) in one dietary survey. Other fruits that were important contributors were ‘Berries and small fruits’ with a contribution above 30% of the total exposure in several dietary surveys (LB). Other food groups that contributed to the dietary exposure to AOH were ‘Fruit nectar’, mainly in the young population (‘Infants’, ‘Toddlers’ and ‘Other children’) and at the UB scenario (see Section 3.1.1). In the adult population (‘Adults’, ‘Elderly’, and ‘Very elderly’), some other food commodities appeared as main contributors, among them ‘Wine’, with a contribution above 20% in 28 dietary surveys (up to 67%, LB) and ‘Breakfast cereals’, the latter mainly at the UB.
Food commodities that reported the highest levels of AOH, such as buckwheat and oat grains (see Section 3.1.1), were not important contributors to the exposure due to their relative low consumption across dietary surveys. In general, grains as such are not widely consumed and, in particular, buckwheat and oat grains are neither widely used in the production of grain‐based products (e.g. fine bakery wares) compared to wheat grains, for instance.
Detailed information on the different food contributors by age class and dietary survey is shown in Appendix D.1.
Table 10 shows summary statistics for the mean and 95th percentile chronic dietary exposure to AME across different age classes. The detailed mean and 95th percentile dietary exposure estimates calculated for each of the 35 dietary surveys are presented in Appendix C.2.
The dietary exposure to AME was lower than that estimated for AOH. As observed for AOH, the highest dietary exposure to AME was estimated in ‘Toddlers’ and ‘Other children’. For ‘Toddlers’, the mean exposure ranged between 3.4 and 38.8 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB) and the 95th percentile dietary exposure between 10.3 and 97.3 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB). For ‘Other children’, the mean dietary exposure varied between 1.6 and 34.4 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB) and the 95th percentile exposure between 6.5 and 89.9 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB).
Overall, the main contributors to the exposure to AME were ‘Vegetable oil’ and ‘Pome fruits’ (pears). ‘Vegetable oils’ were particularly important in Mediterranean countries due to the consumption of olive oil, but also in other countries due to the consumption of sunflower oil. Contributions up to 75% (LB) were observed in some countries for ‘Vegetable oil’, with contributions above 25% in 12 dietary surveys among ‘Toddlers’ and ‘Other children’. ‘Pears’ also had an important contribution mainly in the young population (‘Infants’, ‘Toddlers’ and ‘Other children’) with up to 68% of the total contribution (median = 40%, LB), and in the adult population (‘Adults’, ‘Elderly’ and ‘Very elderly’) with up to 67% of the total contribution (median = 34%, LB).
When considering the UB scenario, some processed grain‐based products appeared in certain cases as main contributors of the dietary exposure to AME, in particular ‘Bread and rolls’ and ‘Breakfast cereals’. Although both commodities reported very low mean values of AME (and with 99% of non‐quantified results), they are commodities that are commonly consumed across the different dietary surveys. Detailed information on the different food contributors by age class and dietary survey is shown in Appendix D.2.
Table 11 shows summary statistics for the mean and 95th percentile chronic dietary exposure to TeA across different age classes. The detailed mean and 95th percentile dietary exposure estimates calculated for each of the 35 dietary surveys are presented in Appendix C.3.
The dietary exposure to TeA was by far the highest among the different Alternaria toxins. The highest mean dietary exposure to TeA was estimated in ‘Toddlers’ and ‘Infants’. For ‘Toddlers’, the mean exposure ranged between 100 and 1,614 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB), and for ‘Infants’ between 37 and 1,490 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB). In the highly exposed population (95th percentile), the highest estimates were in ‘Infants’ (98–3,603 ng/kg bw per day, LB–UB), also followed by ‘Toddlers’ (209–1,216 ng/kg bw per day, LB–UB).
Overall, the main contributor to the high dietary exposure to TeA in ‘Infants’ was ‘Cereal‐based food for infants and young children’, in four of the six dietary surveys representing between 69% and 94% of the total exposure. ‘Cereal‐based food for infants and young children’ continued being an important contributor to the total exposure in several dietary surveys for ‘Toddlers’ (up to 95%), although other food commodities such as ‘Fruiting vegetables’ (tomatoes) and diverse tomato‐based products also contributed considerably to the exposure.
In the adult population (‘Adults’, ‘Elderly’ and ‘Very elderly’), ‘Fruiting vegetables’ (tomatoes) were, overall, the main contributors to the exposure to TeA, with a maximum contribution of 45% (LB), and more than 25% contribution in 19 dietary surveys. In addition, several tomato‐based foods grouped under ‘Vegetable products’ and ‘Savoury sauces’ were important contributors to the total exposure in these age classes. It should be also mentioned that when considering the UB, processed grain‐based products such as ‘Bread and rolls’ played a key role in the exposure to TeA, with an median contribution in the adult population of 27% of the total.
Detailed information on the different food contributors by age class and dietary survey is shown in Appendix D.3.
Table 12 shows summary statistics for the mean and 95th percentile chronic dietary exposure to TEN across different age classes. The detailed mean and 95th percentile dietary exposure estimates calculated for each of the 35 dietary surveys are presented in Appendix C.4.
The highest mean exposure to TEN was estimated in ‘Toddlers’ and ‘Other children’ (Table 12). For ‘Toddlers’, the mean exposure ranged between 1.6 and 33.4 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB) and for ‘Other children’ between 0.7 and 30.1 ng/kg bw per day (LB–UB). Regarding the 95th percentile exposure, the maximum estimates were for three different age classes, Toddlers’, ‘Other children’ and ‘Adolescents’, the three with values around 55 ng/kg bw per day.
The major contributor to the dietary exposure to TEN across all age classes was ‘Tomatoes’, under the food group ‘Fruiting vegetables’ (Appendix D.4), with a maximum contribution of 93% on the total exposure (median = 60%). The relative high consumption of oilseeds in diverse countries, in particular ‘Sunflower seeds’, also situated this food group as one of the main contributors to the exposure to TEN (more than 10 dietary surveys with contribution above 40% of the total). Detailed information on the different food contributors by age class and dietary survey is shown in Appendix D.4.
The current dietary exposure estimates in ‘Adults’ were compared with those published in the 2011 EFSA scientific opinion (EFSA CONTAM Panel, 2011) (Table 13).
For AOH, similar dietary exposure estimations were observed at the LB estimations, although slightly lower in particular dietary surveys which could be explained, at least in part, by the absence of quantified levels of AOH in commodities such as ‘Pasta’ and ‘Rice’ as compared to 2011. Much lower values were observed at the UB estimations in the current report indicating that the differences at occurrence level between the LB and UB in some of the major food contributors are lower than in the 2011 scientific opinion.
For AME, slightly higher LB estimations were observed mainly due to the availability of more occurrence data on key commodities (e.g. olive oil). However, the increase was more evident at the UB estimations due to data on some commodities that were available for this report but with relatively high differences between the LB and UB occurrence values, e.g. ‘Bread and rolls’, ‘Fine bakery wares’.
Regarding the dietary exposure to TeA, the dietary exposure was higher (the LB and UB estimates) than in 2011. This is explained to a great extent by a better coverage of certain food commodities (e.g. tomato‐based products) and the higher levels reported for some of them as compared to 2011. The current availability of food commodities, such as ‘Bread and rolls’, with quantified levels, also played an important role in the increase in the dietary exposure to TeA, in particular at the UB due to the very small number of quantified samples.
Finally, for the dietary exposure to TEN, higher estimates were observed in comparison to the 2011 EFSA opinion. This was due to the higher amount of occurrence data available but, above all, to the presence of few quantified samples in relatively highly consumed foods (e.g. ‘Tomatoes’) and others (e.g. ‘Fruit juice’ or ‘Grain milling products’) as compared to 2011.
Overall, the main food contributors to the dietary exposure to the different Alternaria toxins were similar to those described in the 2011 EFSA scientific opinion; the main difference regards the marked increase in the contribution of tomato‐based products in the exposure to the different toxins, in particular to TeA, as more occurrence data and the higher levels were reported as compared to the 2011 EFSA scientific opinion.
Unlike the 2011 EFSA scientific opinion, in this report, dietary exposure was assessed in all age classes, including the young population (‘Infants’, ‘Toddlers’ and ‘Other children’). As usually observed, the dietary exposure estimates were highest in the young population owing to their high food consumption in relation to body weight. Particularly high was the dietary exposure to TeA observed for ‘Infants’ and ‘Toddlers’ as consequence of the high levels of this Alternaria toxin reported in ‘Cereal‐based food for infants and young children’. The current reported levels of TeA in this food commodity were much higher as compared to the 2011 EFSA scientific opinion.
Although more occurrence data became available since the publication of the 2011 CONTAM panel opinion, the current dietary exposure estimations were strongly influenced by the high amount of left‐censored data (92%).
The dietary exposure to each of the four Alternaria toxins in the two dietary surveys covering ‘Pregnant women’ and ‘Lactating women’ were within the range of exposure estimates in the adult population (Table 14).
Based on the type of food commodities for which the levels on Alternaria toxins were reported, vegetarians could be expected to have higher exposure than the general population. Although not many consumption data on this population group are available in the Comprehensive Database, there are few dietary surveys with subjects that declared themselves as vegetarians at the time of the survey. Considering the surveys with at least 15 vegetarians, the available consumption data were grouped in seven dietary surveys that covered 10 different population groups (dietary survey + age class).
Table 15 shows the dietary exposure to the four Alternaria toxins (AOH, AME, TeA and TEN) in the dietary survey with the highest number of reported vegetarians and the only one with more than 60 subjects. For each of the different Alternaria toxins, vegetarians have a higher exposure than the general population. However, due to the small sample size of the vegetarian populations, the exposure estimates should be carefully interpreted. The dietary exposure estimations for vegetarians in each of the dietary surveys are shown in Appendix C.5.
A qualitative evaluation of the inherent uncertainties in the assessment of the dietary exposure to Alternaria toxins was performed following the guidance of the Opinion of the Scientific Committee related to Uncertainties in Dietary Exposure Assessment (EFSA, 2007).
There is uncertainty related to the representativity of the food samples across Europe as 70% of the analytical data were produced from food samples collected in just one MS. The large proportion of left‐censored data introduces uncertainty to the overall dietary exposure estimates; in the final data set, 92% of the analytical results were left‐censored. This particularly affects those commodities with relatively high consumption and with very few quantified results (e.g. ‘Bread and rolls’). While the LB values tend to underestimate the chronic dietary exposure to Alternaria, UB values tend to overestimate it. The limited number of quantified results in particular food subgroups adds uncertainty to the mean concentration values used to estimate exposure and to the identification of the main food groups responsible of the exposure. Likewise, the lack of information on the analytical method used to analyse some food samples (~ 70%) adds some uncertainty to the levels of Alternaria toxins reported.
Uncertainties and limitations related to the use of the EFSA Comprehensive Food Consumption Database have already been described elsewhere (EFSA, 2011b) and are not further detailed; only those with a particular impact on the dietary exposure to Alternaria toxins are mentioned here. The main uncertainty refers to the link between occurrence and consumption data for some very specific tomato‐based products, for which a specific FoodEx code (level 4) does not exists such as for tomato sauce (codified as ‘Vegetable sauce’) or tomato soup (codified as ‘Vegetable soup’). In these occasions, occurrence and consumption data were linked at FoodEx level 3. Likewise, for other commonly consumed tomato‐based products that may contain relatively high levels of Alternaria toxins, such as ‘Tomato broth’, no occurrence data were available. This adds uncertainty to the exposure estimates derived from the consumption of these commodities and thus to the overall exposure. Further uncertainty associated to the exposure estimations is also identified when linking ‘Simple cereals which are or have to be reconstituted with milk or other appropriate nutritious liquids’ and ‘Cereals with an added high protein food which are or have to be reconstituted with water or other protein‐free liquid’ with consumption, since the occurrence values mostly refer to gluten‐free products and this information was not present at consumption level.
Table 16 shows a summary of the uncertainty evaluation indicating an estimate of whether the respective source of uncertainty might have led to an over‐ or underestimation of the exposure.
Overall, the dietary exposure to each of the Alternaria toxins calculated in this report is likely to overestimate the exposure levels of the European population, in particular at the upper bound estimation.
The most recent data available on Alternaria toxins (2010–2015) were used to estimate chronic dietary exposure. The final data set was composed of 15,563 analytical results/4,249 samples: 3,648 on AOH, 3,654 on AME, 4,168 on TeA and 4,093 on TEN. Most of the analytical data used to estimate the dietary exposure were left‐censored data (92%). In total, there were only 1,290 quantified results, with the majority reported for TeA (n = 822), followed by TEN (n = 196), AME (n = 163) and AOH (n = 109). The highest levels among the four Alternaria toxins assessed were reported for TeA. The food commodities with the highest mean levels varied depending on the toxin considered; overall, relatively high levels were reported for tomato‐based products, tree nuts, oil seeds, grains and fruits.The chronic dietary exposure estimations were strongly influenced by the high amount of left‐censored data. In general, the highest dietary exposure was estimated in the age classes ‘Toddlers’ and ‘Other children’. The dietary exposure to TeA was by far the highest among the different Alternaria toxins. For this particular toxin, ‘Infants’ and ‘Toddlers’ were the age classes with the highest exposure with ‘Cereal‐based food for infants and young children’ as the main contributor.Vegetarians seem to have higher dietary exposure to the different Alternaria toxins than the general population.Overall, compared to the 2011 EFSA opinion, higher exposure estimates were observed (LB and UB). This is explained to a great extent by the higher amount of occurrence data available, and by the higher levels reported for some food commodities, some of them major contributors to the exposure
To develop more sensitive analytical methods allowing the reduction of the uncertainty associated to the exposure to the different Alternaria toxins due to the high percentage of left‐censored data.To generate more analytical data on Alternaria toxins in relevant food commodities (e.g. fruit and fruit products, tomatoes and tomato‐based products, cereal‐based food for infants and young children, among others).
ALTaltenueneAMEalternariol monomethyl etherAOHalternariolATXaltertoxinsbwbody weightCONTAMEFSA Panel on Contaminants in the Food ChainLBlower boundLC–MS/MSliquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometryLODlimit of detectionLOQlimit of quantificationMBmiddle boundMLmaximum levelMSMember StateSOPstandard operating procedureSSDStandard Sample DescriptionTeAtenuazonic acidTENtentoxinTTCthreshold of toxicological concernUBupper bound
CountrySurvey acronymMethodSurvey periodNo. of days per subjectInfantsN of subjectsToddlersOther childrenAdolescents (mean age) AdultsElderlyVery elderlyAustriaASNS ‐ Adults24‐h dietary recall2010–20122––––3086725ASNS – Children24‐h dietary recall2010–20123–128237–––BelgiumRegional FlandersFood record2002–20023–36625––––BelgiumDiet National 200424‐h dietary recall20042–––576 (16a) 1,292511704BulgariaNUTRICHILD24‐h dietary recall20072861428433––––CyprusChildhealthFood record20033–––303 (13a) –––Czech RepublicSISP0424‐h dietary recall2003–20042––389298 (13a) 1,666––DenmarkDANSDA 2005‐08Food record2005–20087––298377 (13a) 1,73927412DenmarkIAT 2006 07Food record2006–20077826917–––––FinlandDIPP 2001 2009Food record2001–20093500500750––––FinlandNWSSP07 0848‐h dietary recall2007–20084–––306 (13a) –––FinlandFINDIET201248‐h dietary recall20122––––1,295413–FranceINCA2Food record20077––482973 (14a) 2,27626484GermanyVELSFood record2001–20026159348293––––GermanyEsKiMoFood record20063––835393 (11a) –––GermanyNational Nutrition Survey II24‐h dietary recall20072–––1,011 (16a) 10,4192,006490GreeceRegional CreteFood record2004–20053–838––––GreeceDIET LACTATION GRFood record2005–20073––––65––HungaryNational Repr SurvFood record20033––––1,07420680IrelandNANS 2012Food record2008–20104––––1,27414977ItalyINRAN SCAI 2005 06Food record2005–200631636193247 (14a) 2,313290228LatviaEFSA TEST24‐h dietary recall20082–187453 (14a) 1,271––LatviaFC PREGNANTWOMEN 201124‐h dietary recall20112––––1,002––NetherlandsVCP kidsFood record2006–20073–322957––––NetherlandsVCPBasis AVL2007 201024‐h dietary recall2007–20102––4471,142 (14a) 2,057173–NetherlandsVCP‐ElderlyFood record; 24‐h dietary recall2010–20122–––––289450RomaniaDieta Pilot AdultsFood record20127––––1,2548345SpainenKid24‐h dietary recall1998–20002–17156209 (12a) –––SpainAESANFood record1999–20013––––410––SpainNUT INK0524‐h dietary recall2004–20052–399651 (14a) –––SpainAESAN FIAB24‐h dietary recall20093–––86 (17a) 981––SwedenNFA24‐h dietary recall20034––14731,018 (12a) –––SwedenRiksmaten 2010Food record2010–20114––––1,43029572United KingdomNDNS‐RollingProgrammeYears1‐3Food record2008–20114–185651666 (14a) 1,266166139United KingdomDNSIYC 2011Food record201141,3691,314–––––N: number.
Appendices B–D can be found in the online version of this output (‘Supporting information’ Section): https://doi.org/10.2903/j.efsa.2016.4654