AbstractThis scientific opinion of the EFSA Panel on Food Contact Materials, Enzymes, Flavourings and Processing Aids (CEF) deals with the safety assessment of the active substance potassium metabisulfite, food contact material (FCM) substances No 1056, intended to extend the shelf life of wine. The active substance is sulfur dioxide (SO
2, E 220) which is generated in situ from potassium metabisulfite, E 224. Alternative precursors of SO
2 are other authorised sulfites marketed as food preservatives. A gel of agar (E 406) is used as a physical support media for the E 224 and the E 220 generated from it. This mixture is contained within plastic containers that are closed with a membrane of polyethersulfone (PES). When the precursor comes in contact with water contained in the agar gel, sulfur dioxide is formed. The PES acts as a microporous membrane which ensures the controlled diffusion of SO
2 from the active cap to the wine. Interactions and reactions between the active ingredients and the PES or the agar or the plastic caps, and any consequential release of reaction products into the wine, are not to be expected. The CEF Panel concluded that the substance potassium metabisulfite (E 224), as well as any of the other authorised ‘sulfites’ (E 221, E 222, E 223, E 226, E 227 and E 228) would not be a safety concern for the consumer if used as precursors for the release of sulfur dioxide (E 220) to wine under the conditions considered in the present opinion. The release of SO
2 should not cause an exceedance of the maximum permitted levels (MPLs) for total SO
2 (free SO
2 plus combined SO
2) in wine given in Regulation (EC) No 606/2009 and Regulation (EC) No 203/2012. The conclusions and the recommendations of the EFSA Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources Added to Food (ANS) Panel on the re‐evaluation of sulfur dioxide and sulfites should be considered.

Regulation (EC) No 450/20091 of the Commission of European Communities is a specific measure that lays down specific rules for active and intelligent materials and articles intended for contact with foodstuffs in addition to the general requirements established in Regulation (EC) No 1935/20042 of the European Parliament and of the Council on materials and articles intended to come into contact with food. Active materials and articles are intended to extend the shelf life or to maintain or improve the condition of packaged food; they are designed to deliberately incorporate components that would release or absorb substances into or from the packaged food or the environment surrounding the food.
The substance(s) responsible for the active and/or intelligent function of the material should be included in a positive list by the Commission following a safety evaluation by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) according to the procedure described in the above‐mentioned regulations.
According to this procedure, the industry submits applications to the Member States competent authorities which transmit the applications to EFSA for their evaluation. The application is supported by a technical dossier submitted by the industry following the EFSA ‘Guidelines on submission of a dossier for safety evaluation by EFSA of active or intelligent substances present in active and intelligent materials and articles intended to come into contact with food’ (EFSA CEF Panel, 2009).
In this case, EFSA received an application from the Direction Génerale de la Concurrence, de la Consommation et de la Repression des Fraudes, requesting the evaluation of Biocork® sulfites‐active caps.
According to Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council on materials and articles intended to come into contact with food, EFSA is asked to carry out an assessment of the risks related to the intended use of the substance and to deliver a scientific opinion.
The applicant has submitted a dossier in support of their application for the authorisation of potassium metabisulfite to be used in active food contact materials (FCM).
Data submitted and used for the evaluation are:

Non‐toxicological data and information
Chemical identityDescription of manufacturing process of substancePhysical and chemical propertiesIntended useExisting authorisation(s)Migration of the substance and related reaction products


Toxicological data
A short summary of the acute and chronic toxicity of sulfur dioxide when used as a food additive.

In the context of the safety evaluation by EFSA of active or intelligent substances present in active and intelligent materials and articles intended to come into contact with food (EFSA CEF Panel, 2009), the safety evaluation is conducted using the general methodological framework established for monomers and additives used to make plastics and published as the guidelines of the Scientific Committee on Food (SCF) (European Commission, 2001).
The assessment was conducted in line with the principles laid down in Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 on materials and articles intended to come into contact with food. This Regulation underlines that applicants may consult the Guidelines of the SCF for the presentation of an application for safety assessment of a substance to be used in FCMs prior to its authorisation (European Commission, 2001), including the corresponding data requirements. The dossier that the applicant submitted for evaluation was in line with the SCF guidelines (European Commission, 2001).
The methodology is based on the characterisation of the substance(s) that is/are the subject of the request for safety assessment prior to authorisation, its impurities and reaction and degradation products, the evaluation of the exposure to those substances through migration, and the definition of minimum sets of toxicity data required for safety assessment. For active substances that are intended to be released themselves or to cause the release of other substances into foods, additional considerations apply with respect to their safety and status as direct food additives. These considerations are described in the EFSA guidelines on active or intelligent substances (EFSA CEF Panel, 2009).
Apart from the intentional release of substances into food, the use of active or intelligent substances may also give rise to an unintentional release of other substances. In those cases, to establish the safety from ingestion of any such migrating substances, the toxicological data indicating the potential hazard and the likely human exposure data need to be combined. Exposure is estimated from studies on migration into food or food simulants and considering that a person may consume daily up to 1 kg of food in contact with the relevant FCM.
As a general rule, the greater the exposure through migration, the more toxicological data is required for the safety assessment of a substance. Currently, there are three tiers with different thresholds triggering the need for more toxicological information as follows:
In case of high migration (i.e. 5–60 mg/kg food), an extensive data set is needed.In case of migration between 0.05 and 5 mg/kg food, a reduced data set may suffice.In case of low migration (i.e. < 0.05 mg/kg food), only a limited data set is needed.

More detailed information on the required data is available in the SCF guidelines (European Commission, 2001).
The assessment was conducted in line with the principles described in the EFSA Guidance on transparency in the scientific aspects of risk assessment (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2009) and considering the relevant existing guidances from the EFSA Scientific Committee.
According to the applicant, the sulfites‐active caps are active capsules intended to extend the shelf life of foodstuffs (principally, wine). They are used on containers, such as boxes, jars, pouches, bags and barrels. The sulfites‐active caps consist of small devices that are designed to be fixed on the stoppers of these various containers, in order to slowly release sulfur dioxide through a functional membrane into and around the packaged foodstuff. The progressive diffusion allows to maintain for a longer time, a minimal but optimal level of free SO2 to protect the wine against oxidation and spoilage during storage. This controlled release counterbalances the tendency for SO2 levels to fall due to reactions in the wine over time. Different designs and sizes provide controlled release and optimal dosing profiles for the different sizes and types of wine containers involved.
The active substance is sulfur dioxide (SO2, E 220) which in the present application is generated in situ from potassium metabisulfite (K2S2O5, E 224). Alternative precursors that produce the active substance SO2 are other authorised sulfite formulations marketed as food preservatives. A gel of agar (E 406) is used as a physical support media for the E 224 and the E 220 generated from it. This mixture is contained within plastic containers of different sizes and forms. The containers are closed with a synthetic membrane of polyethersulfone (PES).
Under the conditions of the manufacturing process used for active caps, SO2 precursors, such as E 224 (K2S2O5) powder, coming in contact with water contained in the agar gel produces the released active substance sulfur dioxide:
K2S2O5(s)→K2O(s)+2SO2(g)↑


In the aqueous media of the gel, there is an equilibrium between molecular sulfur dioxide (SO2) and the anions, bisulfite (HSO3
−) and sulfite (SO3
2−), which are collectively and conventionally defined as ‘free SO2’.
The plastic containers and their covers are made of polyethylene (PE) or polypropylene (PP).
The membrane used to seal the caps is made of PES. It acts as a microporous membrane, which is permeable to water and gas and which ensures the diffusion of SO2 from the active cap to the wine. The membrane is sealed by physical means (common welding methods, such as radio frequency, ultrasonic or heat thermosealing) and no adhesives are used.
Agar (E 406) is used as a gel support. The gel network of agar is used to confine SO2 and control its kinetics of diffusion into the wine. Agar (E 406) is an unbranched polysaccharide prepared from the cell walls of some species of red seaweeds.
According to the applicant, the sulfites‐active caps are recommended to be used mainly with white wines, rosés and sweet wines. The maximal amounts of total SO2 (free SO2 + combined SO2) in wine are strictly regulated (Regulation (EC) No 606/20093 and Regulation (EC) No 203/20124). Data were provided to demonstrate that the release properties could be tailored to achieve in compliance with these regulations. According to the applicant, with the sulfites‐active caps, the winemaker has the possibility to reduce substantially the dose of sulfites in wine before filling, and to choose the suitable diffusion profile for the wine and the market.
Information was provided to demonstrate that the PES membranes are inert to a wide range of media (dilute and concentrated acids and bases, organic solvents, etc.) and the Panel concluded that interactions and reactions of the PES with the active ingredients, and any consequential release of reaction products into the wine, is not to be expected. Similarly, no undesirable interactions or reactions between the active ingredients and the PE or PP containers or the agar gel are to be expected.
The applicant provided limited information on the acute and chronic toxicity of sulfur dioxide. The literature is extensive and the information provided was indicative rather than comprehensive. The Panel did not request any additional information on toxicity, given that sulfur dioxide and potassium metabisulfite are authorised as food additives and that sulfur dioxide and sulfites (E 220–228) have been re‐evaluated recently.
The EFSA Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to Food (ANS) delivered a scientific opinion re‐evaluating sulfur dioxide (E 220) along with sodium sulfite (E 221), sodium bisulfite (E 222), sodium metabisulfite (E 223), potassium metabisulfite (E 224), calcium sulfite (E 226), calcium bisulfite (E 227) and potassium bisulfite (E 228) when used as food additives (EFSA ANS Panel, 2016). Sulfur dioxide–sulfites (E 220–228) are authorised overall in 40 food categories in the EU according to Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 1333/20085 with maximum permitted levels (MPLs) ranging from 20 to 2,000 mg/kg. Sulfur dioxide–sulfites (E 220–228) may also be used in wines and liquors. This use is regulated in Annex IB to Regulation (EC) No 606/2009.
The ANS Panel noted that sulfur dioxide, bisulfite and sulfite ions coexist in solution in a series of equilibria and that a read across between the different sulfites used as food additives is possible.
They concluded that the current group acceptable daily intake (ADI) of 0.7 mg SO2 equivalent/kg body weight (bw) per day would remain adequate but that it should be considered temporary while the toxicity database was improved. They noted that the studies recommended for improving the database could require 5 years for completion.
The ANS Panel estimated chronic exposure to sulfur dioxide–sulfites (E 220–228) for the following population groups: infants, toddlers, children, adolescents, adults and the elderly. From these estimates and of relevance to the application under evaluation here, using a regulatory MPL exposure assessment scenario, the food groups ‘Wine’ and ‘Meat preparations’ were the main food contributors for adults and the elderly. Using a variety of more refined exposure assessment scenarios, again ‘Wine’ was the main contributor to the exposure of adults and the elderly to sulfur dioxide–sulfites (E 220–228). They noted that with the MPLs scenario, exposure estimates were largely higher than the current group ADI at all ages, and frequently close or above the group ADI using the more refined scenarios.
Data were provided by the applicant for the sulfites‐active caps under evaluation, to demonstrate that the release properties could be tailored to achieve in compliance with the MPL regulations for wine. No description or information was provided for other food groups to which sulfur dioxide–sulfites can legally be added and so this opinion is limited to the use of sulfite‐active caps for wine only. The Panel noted that use of such active packaging would represent a substitution for the direct addition of SO2–sulfites additives to wines before filling and would not be an additional source of exposure. Thus, the Panel concluded that consumer exposure to SO2 from the consumption of wine that uses such active packaging would be expected to be no higher and possibly could be lower than exposure from the consumption of wine that is dosed conventionally with SO2–sulfites additives.
According to the applicant, the SO2 is generated in situ from potassium metabisulfite (K2S2O5, E 224) in the present application but that alternative precursors are other authorised sulfite formulations marketed as food preservatives. Given that the wine is separated from the source of the SO2 by the chemically inert PES membrane, the Panel considers that any of the authorised ‘sulfites’ (E 221, E 222, E 223, E 224, E 226, E 227 and E 228) would be an acceptable precursor provided that it met the specifications according to Commission Regulation (EU) No 231/20126.
The CEF Panel after having considered the above‐mentioned information, concludes that the substance potassium metabisulfite (E 224) along with other authorised ‘sulfites’ E 221, E 222, E 223, E 226, E 227 and E 228, would not be a safety concern for the consumer if used as precursors for the release of sulfur dioxide to wine under the conditions considered in the present opinion.
The release of SO2 should not cause an exceedance of the MPLs for total SO2 (free SO2 plus combined SO2) in wine given in Regulation (EC) No 606/20093 and Regulation (EC) No 203/20124. The conclusions and the recommendations of the EFSA ANS Panel (2016) should be considered.

Dossier Biocork® sulphites‐active caps. January 2015. Submitted by BIO‐CORK Sarl, France.Additional data for the dossier: August 2015. Submitted by BIO‐CORK Sarl, France.Additional data for the dossier: October 2015. Submitted by BIO‐CORK Sarl, France.


ADIacceptable daily intakeANSPanel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources Added to Foodbwbody weightCEFPanel on Food Contact Materials, Enzymes, Flavourings and Processing AidsECEuropean CommissionFCMfood contact materialsMPLmaximum permitted levelPEpolyethylenePESpolyethersulfonePPpolypropyleneSCFScientific Committee on Food
