AbstractThis report provides an analysis and critical assessment of the sampling strategy, the data collected, and the detection methods used in the Echinococcus multilocularis surveillance carried out in Finland, Ireland, Malta, United Kingdom (UK) and Norway in 2015 and included in the 2016 report in the context of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011 regarding preventive health measures for the control of E. multilocularis infection in dogs. The surveillance aims at detecting the parasite, if present in any part of those countries. The 2015 surveillance reports of the four Member States and Norway were assessed by checking the description of the surveillance system for completeness against the relevant elements that need to be addressed in assessing the quality of E. multilocularis surveillance reports. The data reported on individual samples were assessed using the raw data submitted by each country via the EFSA Data Collection Framework (DCF). None of the four Member States, nor Norway, who are operating an E. multilocularis‐specific surveillance programme to detect the parasite, should it be present in any part of those Member States, has recorded positive samples in 2015. Descriptive statistics were computed to check whether the legal requirements had been fulfilled. Under the assumption of an unbiased representative sampling and considering the sensitivity of the tests applied, the four MS (Finland, Ireland, Malta and the UK) and Norway have succeeded in implementing surveillance activities able to detect E. multilocularis at 1% prevalence maximum, with a 95% confidence level, fulfilling the requirement of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011.

Following a request from the European Commission and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) Surveillance Authority, the EFSA Animal and Plant Health (ALPHA) Unit was asked to provide scientific and technical assistance with the evaluation of the surveillance data submitted by five countries on Echinococcus multilocularis infection in animals.
This report addresses the Terms of Reference (ToR) 2 of the mandates M‐2012‐0200 and M‐2014‐0287 submitted to EFSA by the European Commission and the EFTA Surveillance Authority, respectively, and applies the principles and procedures established in the EFSA reports ‘Scientific and technical assistance on infection in animals’ (EFSA, 2012a) and ‘A framework to substantiate absence of disease: the risk‐based estimate of system sensitivity tool (RiBESS) using data collated according to the EFSA Standard Sample Description – An example on Echinococcus multilocularis’ (EFSA, 2012b). The other term of reference ToR 1 has been addressed by an Article 36 cooperation project of EFSA (Casulli et al., 2015). This report provides an analysis and critical assessment of the sampling strategy, the data collected and the detection methods used in the E. multilocularis surveillance carried out in Finland, Ireland, Malta and the United Kingdom (UK) and Norway. All relevant information and related data were reported in 2016 in the context of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011 regarding preventive health measures for the control of E. multilocularis infection in dogs. The surveillance aims at detecting the parasite, if present in any part of those Member States or the mainland of Norway.
The quality of the 2016 surveillance reports, on 2015 data, of the four Member States and Norway was assessed by checking the description of the surveillance system for completeness against the relevant elements that need to be addressed in the context of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011. In a second step, the raw data on individual samples, submitted by the five countries via the EFSA Data Collection Framework (DCF), were analysed and descriptive statistics were computed to check whether the requirements of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011 had been fulfilled.
Finland, Ireland, the UK and Norway drew a representative sample from wildlife definitive hosts present in their territory, while Malta implemented a risk‐based sampling at dog population level only, due to the absence of wildlife definitive hosts species in its territory.
None of the five countries who are operating an E. multilocularis‐specific surveillance programme to detect the parasite, should it be present in any part of those Member States, has recorded positive samples in 2015.
Under the assumption of an unbiased representative sampling and considering the sensitivity of the tests applied, the four MS (Finland, Ireland, Malta and the UK) and Norway have succeeded in implementing surveillance activities able to detect E. multilocularis at 1% prevalence maximum, with a 95% confidence level, fulfilling the requirement of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011.
Human alveolar echinococcosis (AE) is caused by the larval stage of the fox tapeworm Echinococcus multilocularis (EM) It is among one of the most dangerous zoonoses. In nature, the parasite transmits between foxes or dogs and small mammals while humans are aberrant intermediate hosts. In rodents, the larval mass proliferates rapidly by exogenous budding of germinative tissue and produces an alveolar‐like pattern of microvesicles filled with protoscolices. In humans, the larval mass resembles a malignancy in appearance and behaviour because it proliferates indefinitely by exogenous budding and invades the surrounding tissues (Moro and Schantz, 2008). Transmission of AE to humans is by consumption of parasite eggs which are excreted in the faeces of foxes and dogs. Human infection can be through direct contact with the definitive host or indirectly through contamination of food or possibly water with parasite eggs (Torgerson et al., 2010).
Until the 1990s, only a ‘core’ area consisting of eastern France, southern Germany and parts of Switzerland and Austria were known to be endemic. Since 1980, EM‐infections in animals have been recorded in 17 countries, in central‐eastern Europe, previously thought to be free. The observed prevalence of EM‐infected animals as well as the abundance of host species increased in the Baltic areas, Denmark, Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia during the 1990s and have continued to increase. The distribution of EM is not homogeneous, and there are areas of high and low prevalence of EM infection, with values ranging from close to 0% (e.g. Denmark, north‐east Germany, Sweden), to values close to 50% (e.g. part of France, southern Germany, part of Switzerland). These differences in prevalence levels in foxes, among the countries where EM has been reported, have been linked most frequently to the use and structure of landscape, which influences the species range and abundance of rodents as intermediate hosts and to the microclimatic conditions necessary for the transmission and establishment of the parasite.
EM infection has never been detected in wild definitive (native) hosts, or as autochthonous infection in humans in Finland, Ireland, Malta, the United Kingdom and Norway.
EFSA was asked to analyse and critically assess the sampling strategy considered, the data collected and the detection methods used in the E. multilocularis surveillance programmes by the Member States and Norway in the context of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011 regarding preventive health measures for the control of E. multilocularis infection in dogs.
Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011 provides that the Member States that want to apply for listing in Annex I thereof shall have had in place for 10 years prior to their application (a) rules for EM infection in host animals to be compulsorily notifiable under national law; and (b) an early detection system for E. multilocularis infection in host animals. These Member States shall also implement a pathogen‐specific surveillance programme which is to be drawn up and carried out in accordance with Annex II and shall report to the Commission the results of the pathogen‐specific surveillance programme referred to in Annex II by 31 May following the end of each 12‐month surveillance period. The objective of the pathogen‐specific surveillance programme is to provide evidence for absence of E. multilocularis infection in the Member States listed in Annex I. The Decision of the EEA Joint Committee No 103/2012 of 15 June 2012 added the whole territory of Norway1 to the list of countries complying with the conditions of Article 3 of the Regulation.
The following requirements for the pathogen‐specific surveillance programme are laid down in Annex II to Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011: The pathogen‐specific surveillance programme shall be designed to detect, per epidemiologically relevant geographical unit in the Member State or part thereof, a prevalence of not more than 1% at confidence level of at least 95%.The pathogen‐specific surveillance programme shall use appropriate sampling, either risk‐based or representative, that ensures detection of the E. multilocularis parasite if present in any part of the Member State at the design prevalence specified at point 1.The pathogen‐specific surveillance programme shall consist in the ongoing collection, during the 12‐month surveillance period, of samples from wild definitive hosts or, in the case where there is evidence of the absence of wild definitive hosts in the Member State or part thereof, from domestic definitive hosts, to be analysed by examination of: intestinal contents for the detection of the E. multilocularis parasite by the sedimentation and counting technique (SCT), or a technique of equivalent sensitivity and specificity; orfaeces for the detection of species‐specific deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) from tissue or eggs of the E. multilocularis parasite by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), or a technique of equivalent sensitivity and specificity.
Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011 applies since 1 January 2012 and stipulates annual submission of National surveillance reports by the countries listed in Annex I by 31 May of the subsequent year.
The Commission adopted Commission Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011 of 14 July 2011, as regards preventive health measures for the control of E. multilocularis infection in dogs. This was in order to ensure continuous protection of Finland, Ireland, Malta and the United Kingdom that claim to have remained free of the parasite E. multilocularis as a result of applying national rules until 31 December 2011. The Decision of the EEA Joint Committee No 103/2012 of 15 June 2012 added the whole territory of Norway1 to the list of countries complying with the conditions of Article 3 of the Regulation.
This Regulation includes certain obligations for these Member States and Norway to implement a pathogen‐specific surveillance programme aimed at detecting the parasite, if present in any part of those Member States, in accordance with certain requirements regarding the sampling, the detection techniques and the reporting.
It also provides that the Commission is to review this Regulation no later than 5 years following the data of its entry into force, i.e. by December 2016, in the light of scientific developments regarding E. multilocularis infection in animals and submit the results of the review to the European Parliament and to the Council.
Before a formal request for a scientific opinion on the infection with E. multilocularis in animals is addressed to EFSA to take account of the aforementioned deadline, EFSA is asked, in the context of Article 31 of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002, to provide the following scientific and technical assistance to the Commission: Regular follow‐up of the literature regarding E. multilocularis infection in animals in the European Union and adjacent countries, including its geographical distribution and prevalence;Analysis and critical assessment, in the context of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011, of (i) the sampling strategy considered for the programmes of the countries concerned; (ii) the data collected in the framework of these programmes; (iii) the detection methods used.
This report addresses ToR 2 of the mandates M‐2012‐0200 and M‐2014‐0287 submitted to EFSA by the European Commission and the EFTA Surveillance Authority, respectively, and applies the principles and procedures established in the EFSA reports ‘Scientific and technical assistance on E. multilocularis infection in animals’ (EFSA, 2012a) and ‘A framework to substantiate absence of disease: the risk‐based estimate of system sensitivity tool (RiBESS) using data collated according to the EFSA Standard Sample Description – An example on Echinococcus multilocularis’ (EFSA, 2012b). The other term of reference ToR 1 has been addressed by an Article 36 cooperation project of EFSA (Casulli et al., 2015).
To address ToR 2, EFSA has developed a scientific report and a technical report in 2012 (EFSA, 2012a,b). The principles and procedures established therein have been applied in the assessment of each of the four national surveillance reports submitted to the Commission.
In a first step, the quality of the 2016 surveillance reports of the four Member States and Norway was assessed by checking the description of the surveillance system for completeness against the relevant elements that need to be addressed in the context of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011. For each relevant element, (i.e. susceptible host population, timeframe of the surveillance data, relevant epidemiological unit of the surveillance system, geographical clustering of infection, case definition, sensitivity and specificity of tests used, type of survey, survey design, sampling methods, and sample size), the data provided in the surveillance report were collated (see Appendices A–E), and comments were given, if needed.
In a second step, the raw data on individual samples submitted by the five countries via the EFSA Data Collection Framework (DCF) were analysed. For the purpose, the software R (R core Team, 2013) was used to compute descriptive statistics. Table 1 lists and describes all the parameters that were extracted from the data submitted.
In the Finnish E. multilocularis surveillance system, a PCR method for the detection of E. multilocularis eggs in rectal content has been used to test raccoon dog and red fox samples. The PCR method used was described by Isaksson et al. (2014), with a modification in the wash step (manual instead of automatic). The sensitivity of the method was estimated to be 0.78. The test sensitivity was estimated based on the identification of positive controls, i.e. spiked specimens prepared in the laboratory were used: five inactivated (−80°C) E. multilocularis eggs in 3 mL of intestinal content. In an experiment performed in 2014, 131 positive controls were examined, and 78% (n = 102) were found positive by PCR. This was considered as representing the sensitivity of the method. An exact binomial test indicates that the actual value may lie between 0.70 and 0.85 (95% CL). A Bayesian approach gives similar results (see Figure 2). Also, the lowest value of the credible interval (0.70) was used in this EFSA assessment to estimate the overall system sensitivity as a worst‐case scenario.
The susceptible wild definitive host population targeted by the system was defined as raccoon dogs and red foxes. The justifications reported for choosing these target species were the facts that the red fox is the primary host of E. multilocularis in Europe (Deplazes, 2006), and that raccoon dogs have been shown to be good definitive hosts for E. multilocularis (Kapel et al., 2006). This is also confirmed by the EFSA Scientific opinion on Echinococcus multilocularis infection in animals (EFSA, 2015). The raccoon dog is more numerous (230,000) in Finland than the red fox (150,000). Population sizes were estimated by Kauhala (2007) using multiple methods and data, including radio tracking of individual animals, hunting bag statistics, annual snow‐track counts and knowledge on reproductive potential of each species. Those values are based on a scientific study performed in 2007. It should be discussed if the assumption of no modifications between 2007 and today at the population level still holds or if an update would be beneficial.
However, the decision to accept the size of the population as published by Kauhala is scientifically sound, particularly considering that the sample size calculation is not heavily affected when the population size has these dimensions (~ infinite population).
No information on age or gender structure of the target population is available. However, they do not appear to have any role in the epidemiology nor in the lifecycle of EM.
The epidemiological unit was defined as the individual animal.
The sample size has been calculated by Finland using an overall sensitivity of the diagnostic approach of 0.78 and the design prevalence of 1% prescribed in Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011 using the RiBESS tool. The samples are collected by hunters on a voluntary basis. Hunters are informed of the sample collection by press releases in Evira's website and e‐mails and personal contacts to the Finnish Wildlife Agency which in turn informs local hunting associations.
Nearly half (48.6%) of the samples originated from southeast Finland (see Figure 4) as this is the region where active monitoring of rabies control programme has taken place since 1990. The same area can be considered having an elevated risk of introduction of EM due to geographical closeness of infected areas in the south. Also, southeast Finland has the highest density of raccoon dogs in Finland (Kauhala, 2007). A large sample of foxes was received from Lapland where active red fox population reduction to protect the arctic fox was ongoing. In 2015, further efforts were made to get a more geographically representative sample from the southern and western part of the country where foxes and raccoon dogs are abundant. An information letter was addressed to hunters by EVIRA via the Finnish Wildlife Agency, and as a result, more samples from these regions were received. Hunters in regions in Central Finland were not specifically asked to send samples and therefore the number of samples originating from there was relatively low.
Sampling focused on the first four months of the year (73% of samples were collected by the end of April). This is partly due to the fact that 94% of the large sample from Lappi district was collected during January–March and partly because in the southern region, the sampling effort was also greatest in the beginning of the year. In addition, a sufficient amount of samples was analysed, the testing activity was stopped and part of the samples received at the end of the year were not analysed.
A total of 273 and 338 samples were collected from foxes and raccoon dogs, respectively. All 611 samples were negative in PCR. Thus, no sample tested was found positive for Echinococcus multilocularis.
Samples were collected throughout 2015. The sampling activity was distributed over the full year with intensification between January and April. The geographical information shows that 18 out of 20 NUTS3 regions were included in the sampling activity (Figure 4). Explanation is provided. (See Table A.1, ‘Methodology for sample size calculation & implementation of the sampling activity’).
Using the RiBESS tool, under the assumption of a representative sample across the whole territory of Finland as one epidemiological unit, and considering a test sensitivity of 0.78, the value of the area sensitivity, was estimated to be > 0.95. A worst‐case scenario (Test Se = 0.70) has been investigated. Also in this case, the sample size was sufficient to satisfy the requirements.
In summary, the set of data relative to the surveillance activity in 2015 ensure the fulfilment of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011 regarding a confidence level of at least 0.95, against a design prevalence of 1%.
Rectal contents from foxes were examined according to the method of Trachsel et al. (2007) referred to as PCR Cest1‐Cest2 NAD1. The DNA nucleotide sequences of primers are: Cest1 = TGCTGATTTGTTAAAGTTAGTGATC and Cest2 = CATAAATCAATGGAAACAACAACAAG.
The Irish National Reference Laboratory has agreed to undertake within its own laboratory a test sensitivity assessment in collaboration with the EU Reference Laboratory for parasites, who have initiated a pilot trial to supply to each participating laboratory spiked samples. Initially, three samples have been tested. The National Reference Laboratory is willing to test a greater number of samples in accordance with EFSA recommendations and in collaboration with the EU Reference Laboratory.
In accordance with the requirements for pathogen‐specific surveillance for E. multilocularis outlined in Regulation (EU) 1152/2011, the most suitable host species to survey is a wildlife definitive host species. In Ireland, because of the occurrence of red foxes (Vulpes vulpes) throughout the country and no known occurrence of racoon dogs (Hayden and Harrington, 2000; Marnell et al., 2009), the former was selected as the wildlife definitive host species to survey for presence of E. multilocularis. The red fox population has been estimated to be between 150,000 and 200,000 (Hayden and Harrington, 2000; Marnell et al., 2009).
The red fox is a seasonal breeder, cubs are born in the spring and are almost fully grown by seven months of age (Hayden and Harrington, 2000). Therefore, the age structure of the population between young and adult varies depending on the time of year. There is little published scientific evidence of the gender structure of the Irish red fox population.
The red fox is distributed throughout Ireland (Hayden and Harrington, 2000; Marnell et al., 2009). Further information about the distribution of the red fox population within Ireland has been produced in a report by Dr. Tomás Murray from the National Biodiversity Data Centre in 2015. See also Figure 5. Regarding the presence/absence of definitive wild hosts, the information is consistent with the report of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Although the original information regarding the red fox population size was published in 2000 and 2009 by Hayden & Harrington and Marnell et al., respectively, the more recent analysis by Dr. Tomás Murray, of the National Biodiversity Data Centre, Ireland, specifically provided additional information regarding the Irish fox population for the purposes of this survey in 2015, including more recent data on the relative population density distribution based on ongoing observation records (EFSA, 2015). At a population size greater than 10,000, it has been previously demonstrated that moderate fluctuations in the population size would not significantly change the sample size required to achieve the same statistical confidence of less than 1% prevalence at a specific test sensitivity (EFSA, 2014). Therefore, fluctuations in the previous population size of 150,000 do not alter the sample size required significantly (EFSA, 2014). Regarding the age and the gender, they do not appear to have any role in the epidemiology nor in the lifecycle of EM (EFSA, 2015).
The epidemiological unit was defined as the individual animal (faeces post‐mortem).
The animal samples were obtained from foxes which were culled (by shooting) for pest and predator control reasons and foxes that were inadvertently captured in traps set for other wildlife as part of wildlife disease control measures. Each of the 16 Regional Veterinary Offices in Ireland was requested to obtain a number of wild foxes, based on their respective area size and the fox population density to obtain a total number for that region which reflected the number calculated in the ‘Red fox (Vulpes vulpes) Species Distribution Model’ for each area. A slightly greater number than the minimum required to achieve the desired survey sensitivity for the entire survey were tested. The sampling intensity was undertaken to reflect the distribution throughout Ireland and further adjusted to reflect the geographical variation in density of fox population distribution. Samples were obtained during 10 months of the year. A greater number were collected from culling during October, November and December, to avoid culling adult female foxes with fox cubs dependent on their dam to be fed. Collection of samples predominantly during the winter months should not adversely affect the sensitivity of the survey, based on a study from an endemic urban area in Switzerland, which found a greater prevalence of E. multilocularis in foxes in winter months (Hofer et al., 2000).
The design prevalence of 1% prescribed in Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011 and a test sensitivity of 0.78 were used in the sample size calculation.
The collection of 398 samples is reported by Ireland. All samples are reported as having tested negative for E. multilocularis using the PCR Cest1‐Cest2 NAD1 method.
Samples were collected throughout 2015. The sampling activity was distributed over the full year with intensification during winter, at the end of the available sampling period (see Figure 7). The geographical information shows that all regions were included in the sampling activity (see Figure 8).
Using the RiBESS tool under the assumption of a representative sample across the whole territory of Ireland as one epidemiological unit and considering a test sensitivity of 0.78, the value of the area sensitivity, was calculated to be > 0.95.
In summary, the set of data relative to the surveillance activity in 2015 ensures the fulfilment of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011 regarding a confidence level of at least 0.95, against a design prevalence of 1%.
In the Maltese E. multilocularis surveillance system, the Microscopy/PCR RNAsn U1 method was used to analyse faecal samples from live animals. According to the article of Mathis et al. (1996), microscopy/PCR analytical method has a sensitivity of 94% compared to the parasitological findings after examination of the small intestines. The paper of Mathis et al. cited to support the test sensitivity value consists of the simple ratio between the positive samples detected as positive (33) and the total number of positive samples (35). An exact binomial test indicates that the actual value may lie between 0.81 and 0.99 (95% CL). A Bayesian approach gives similar results (see Figure 9). The lowest value was also used in this EFSA assessment to estimate the overall system sensitivity as a worst‐case scenario.
The faeces samples were examined for worm eggs using the flotation and concentration method. All the worm eggs microscopically identified as Taenia spp. were then stored in 75% alcohol for further identification by PCR. The National Veterinary Laboratory in Malta is not accredited for the flotation method on faeces and the method is not yet validated.
The faeces positive for presence of Taenia spp. eggs were sent to the Department of Infectious, Parasitic and Immunomediated Diseases of the Istituto Superiore di Sanità in Rome, Italy, for identification of Echinococcus granulosus, E. multilocularis and Taenia spp. eggs by means of multiplex‐PCR analysis.
In Malta, there are no wild foxes or raccoon dogs and the only carnivore that is present is the weasel (Mustela nivalis). The population of this animal is considered to be very low and it is also worthy of note that Mustela nivalis is not considered to be an elite definitive host. Furthermore, transmission of the disease through Mustela nivalis is considered to be very remote due to their nocturnal and retrieval behaviour. The absence of wildlife definitive host (Vulpes vulpes) worldwide is described by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources – Species Survival Commission (SSC), which has been assessing the conservation status of species, subspecies, varieties, and even selected subpopulations on a global scale in order to highlight taxa threatened with extinction, and therefore promote their conservation. Red fox is described as a species not present in Malta as showed in the map of the distribution of the species available on IUCN website.2 Considering the absence of the definitive wild host population in Malta (including the island of Gozo), dogs may play a role as potential definite hosts in maintaining the life cycle of the parasite, through possible contact with the rodents. The target populations for this study consisted of dogs: the main risk groups identified were ‘Rural’ dogs and ‘Stray dogs’. The estimated dog population, divided into the categories considered for the risk assessment, is the following: Pets, Rural dogs and stray dogs.
The registration and microchipping of dogs in the Maltese Islands is governed by a legal notice LN 199/2011 which obliges all dog owners to microchip and register their animals with the competent authority.
Dog registration is undertaken and managed by the Veterinary Regulation Department. There is no classification of the dog population into pet, rural or hunting dogs in the National Veterinary Information System where information connected to the identified dogs is registered.
The total number of registered dogs in 2015 was 57,477, out of which 29,191 were female and 28,286 were male. The age distribution young to adult dogs was 6,525 young dogs (≤ 2 years) and 50,952 adult dogs (> 2 years). This data was obtained from National Database used to register dogs for microchipping.
Given the high population density of the Maltese Islands distribution of dogs is relatively homogeneous in Malta.
Considering that rural areas are homogeneously distributed across the country, a geographic distribution of the rural dog population was considered as not relevant for the surveillance programme. The estimation done was confirmed by information available at different NGOs operating in Malta and offering free neutering and microchipping for all dogs whose owners receive benefits, as well as for all farm, factory and hunters’ dogs. Estimates of stray dogs are supplied by the six dog sanctuaries present in the Maltese islands. Dogs in this category are identified as non‐pet animals within this surveillance programme.
The estimated dog population, divided into the categories considered for the risk assessment, is the following: Pets = 53,500; Rural dogs = 4,500; Stray dogs = 2,000 for a total of 60,000 animals. The rural dog population is estimated to range between 3.500 and 4.000 considering that the number of farms present in the country are 2.061 (100 pig farms, 289 bovine, 1.672 sheep and goat farms, including those with < 3 animals). It was assumed an average of two dogs for each farm. The estimation done was confirmed by information available at different NGOs operating in Malta and offering free neutering and microchipping for all dogs whose owners receive benefits, as well as for all farm, factory and hunters’ dogs. Records available at the six sanctuaries present in the country show that the stray dogs collected vary from 1,000 to 2,000 per year. Dogs in this category are identified as non‐pet animals within this surveillance programme.
The epidemiological unit was defined as the individual (faeces from live animal).
The sample size was set up using the software Winepiscope 2.0 in order to detect a prevalence of 1% with LC95% within the population at risk. The sample size was identified in 335 samples divided in 150 from stray dogs in dog sanctuaries (domestic‐history unknown) and 185 from rural (rural‐history known).
The categories more at risk were identified in hunting dogs and rural dogs (see Table 2). The Relative Risk was assumed to be 1.2. Another risk factor was assumed for the stratification of the sample. The unknown history of the animal was considered relevant for the possibility of having been in areas not free from the parasite or in areas with high risk. The dogs present in the sanctuaries were identified as animals with unknown history (see Table 3). However, no evidence for any of the two identified risk factors is provided.
Sampling was carried out in two ways: i) samples collected by sampling teams that visited farms to carry out Brucella, TB testing and other on farm inspections such as Animal Welfare inspections; ii) samples from sanctuaries/stray dogs were collected by a dedicated Echinococcus sampling team. Although it cannot be guaranteed that the same dog is not sampled more than once, sampling officers avoid this by preferentially sampling dogs that are kept in farms.
Samples were collected in both Malta and Gozo. In Gozo, samples were collected from 8 localities out of the 14 localities. These localities represent the major rural areas in the island of Gozo. A dog pound is also located in one of these localities, were stray dogs from the all island of Gozo are collected. In Malta, the samples collected from all over the Island, as can be seen from the map at https://www.zeemaps.com/map?group=2011901 (see also Figure 11). In Malta, 34 localities were sampled in the north of the island, and the sampling area included a dog sanctuary that collect stray dogs from north of Malta. Another three Sanctuaries are situated in the south‐east area of the Island.
A total of 335 samples were collected throughout 2015. The sampling activity was distributed over the full year with intensification between March and September (see Figure 10). The geographical information shows that the samples were collected from both of the NUTS 3 regions (see Figure 11).
The Area Sensitivity value was calculated by Malta using the RiBESS tool under the assumption of a risk‐based sample and considering a test Se equal to 0.94. If the test sensitivity is assumed to be 0.94, both a risk‐based approach and a simple random sample ensure an Area Sensitivity greater than 0.95. On the contrary, if the test is assumed to be 0.81 (lower bound of the credible interval based on the data provided) and the RR values cannot be supported by evidence, the Area Sensitivity does not reach the required standard.
In summary, the set of data provided for the year 2015 gives adequate area sensitivity in line with the requirements of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011, provided that adequate evidence is given to support the values for the RR or if the assumption on the test sensitivity is considered valid. Considering that the most recent advice on the matter was published in the Scientific Opinion on Echinococcus multilocularis infection in animals (EFSA, 2015) at the end of the 2015 sampling activity, the test sensitivity assumed by Malta should be accepted.
For future surveys, it is recommended to implement a simple random sampling and assume a test sensitivity equal to 0.78, as indicated in the Scientific opinion on Echinococcus multilocularis infection in animals (EFSA, 2015), section 3.9. In this latter case, the required sample size is equal to 382.
In Great Britain (GB), a PCR test (PCR Cest1‐Cest2 NAD1) was used to detect E. multilocularis DNA in rectal content (post‐mortem sampling) (Mathis et al., 1996; Dinkel et al., 1998). The method is based on the concentration of helminth eggs by a combination of sequential sieving of faecal samples and flotation of the eggs in zinc chloride solution. DNA of the taeniid eggs retained in the 20 microns sieve was obtained after alkaline lysis and nested PCR was performed using E. multilocularis species‐specific primers against the mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene. The paper of Mathis et al. cited to support the test sensitivity value consists of the simple ratio between the positive samples detected as positive (33) and the total number of positive samples (35). An exact binomial test indicates that the actual value may lie between 0.81 and 0.99 (95% CL). A Bayesian approach gives similar results (see Figure 9). The paper of Dinkel et al. also consists of the simple ratio between the positive samples detected as positive (181) and the total number of positive samples (241). An exact binomial test indicates that the actual value may lie between 0.70 and 0.80 (95% CL). A Bayesian approach gives similar results (see Figure 13). The lowest value (0.7 or 70%) was also used in this EFSA assessment to estimate the overall system sensitivity as a worst‐case scenario.
In Northern Ireland (NI), a Sedimentation and Counting Technique (SCT) test was used to detect E. multilocularis eggs from individual intestinal content. The analyses were performed at the Agri‐Food and Biosciences Institute (AFBI). The egg counting method sensitivity is variable between laboratories, but we have used the EFSA proposal to follow Eckert's suggestion to consider a Se of 99% to take account of potential individual errors (Eckert, 2003).
The evidence provided to support the test sensitivity value for the SCT (Eckert, 2003) actually refers to a previous work (Hofer et al., 2000). However, the aim of the latter study was not to estimate the sensitivity of the SCT test, but rather to estimate the prevalence in the target population. Here, it is reported that no sample classified as negative by the SCT was detected positive by the intestinal scraping technique (IST), which could theoretically lead to the conclusion that the SCT has a sensitivity close to 100%, but in reality, there is no information on the real state of the sample (contaminated/not contaminated) nor is there any data on the IST technique. Therefore, the only possible conclusion is that the IST sensitivity is not higher than the one of the SCT. The almost perfect sensitivity of the SCT is actually an assumption. A safer option would be to follow the EFSA recommendation (Test Se = 0.78).
The red fox (Vulpes vulpes) is the only wild definitive host for E. multilocularis in the UK (both GB and Northern Ireland). No other wild definitive host is present. Great Britain and Northern Ireland fox populations are isolated, with no access for wild definitive hosts from continental Europe.
The fox population size (prebreeding adults) has been estimated at 240,000 by wildlife experts, and the numbers were published in 2013.3 The population does fluctuate from year to year, but is believed to be relatively stable, or marginally increasing. The urban fox population is estimated at 33,000 (~ 13%). The variation in abundance is likely correlated with food resources, so while the density in hill areas of Scotland have been estimated at one breeding pair every 40 km2, the highest density recorded was in the urban areas of 30 foxes in a single km2 (http://www.lhnet.org/red-fox/). The rapid spread of sarcoptic mange in the red fox population and lack of geographic barriers demonstrates that there is considerable mixing of the red fox population within GB and within the island of Ireland, despite the variation in abundance. The average range of a red fox in UK in open farm land is considered to be ~ 200–600 ha (2–6 km2). We have good evidence that the total abundance has not changed in the last decade (Wright et al., 2014) as measured on BTO survey squares (mostly rural), and that the urban fox distribution has changed in recent years with almost all urban areas now having foxes present (Scott et al., 2014). A map of systematically estimated fox distribution and abundance using NBN data and published density information and a small project using public sighting data to estimate fox abundance in all urban areas is provided (see Figure 12).
For Northern Ireland, an estimate of 14,000 is given, which is equivalent of 1 fox per km2 and accounts for the large area of rural land in contrast to the urban land use.4 See also Figure 5.
The epidemiological unit is the individual animal. As animal carcasses rather than fox scat are collected, the results can be reported at the individual level with a high level of confidence.
The sample size has been calculated using the EFSA RiBESS tool. Random sampling, not risk‐based sampling, is carried out at certain times of the year – the target is the wild population and therefore hunting is not permitted during the breeding season.
In Great Britain, carcasses of wild animals were collected from research stations, while in Northern Ireland, the carcasses of wild animals were collected from hunting or road kills, therefore only an approximate location of the animal can be used. Hunters and gamekeepers who shoot foxes as part of pest population control were contracted to collect carcasses. Carcasses are delivered to field stations and frozen until sampling is undertaken. Road kills are only occasionally suitable for testing, therefore the number is low. No issues resulting in deviation from sampling plan.
Reports are made at NUTS 3 level (the lowest level of NUTS; in GB individual counties or upper tier authorities, unitary authorities or districts). The NUTS boundaries are only rarely amended and therefore comparisons could be made from 1 year to the next in terms of distribution.
Both maps in Figure 12 show that there is an uneven distribution of the wild host population – some areas have less dense fox populations than others – for example, the highest density is in urban areas in the South West of England, the least dense are rural areas in Northern Scotland (see map) and that this distribution has not changed significantly in the last 10 years. This uneven distribution means sampling of animals is also uneven. Great Britain consists of islands, surrounded by sea with no land bridges for foxes to arrive by, therefore there is a constant population (which varies during the year according to whether the females have given birth). Population size is based on numbers of breeding females.
In GB, the sampling activity was distributed over the 12 months period with intensification between October and January (See Figure 14). Altogether 465 samples were collected and tested. The sampling activity targeted the regions with higher fox density, according with the red fox population density map provided (See Figure 16).
In NI, the sampling activity was distributed over the 12 months period with intensification between August and December (See Figure 15). Altogether 327 samples were collected and tested. The sampling activity targeted the regions with higher fox density (See Figure 16, according to the red fox population density map provided).
The area sensitivity for GB was calculated using the RiBESS tool (NoRF) under the assumption of a representative sample and considering a test Se equal to 0.85. The same calculation was repeated using a Test Se equal to 0.7 (70%) as worst‐case scenario based on the evidence provided. Also in this case, the sample size was sufficient to comply with the EU regulation in force.
The area sensitivity for NI was estimated using the RiBESS tool (NoRF) under the assumption of a representative sample and considering a test Se equal to 0.99. The same calculation was repeated using a Test Se equal to 0.78 (78%) as worst‐case scenario based on EFSA recommendations (EFSA, 2015). In this case, the sample size is not sufficient to comply with the EU regulation in force. (52 additional tests would be required). Considering that the most recent advice on the matter was published in the Scientific Opinion on Echinococcus multilocularis infection in animals (EFSA, 2015) at the end of the 2015 sampling activity, the test sensitivity assumed by Northern Ireland should be accepted.
In summary, the set of data relative to the surveillance activity in 2015 for the United Kingdom ensure the fulfilment of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011 regarding a confidence level of at least 0.95, against a design prevalence of 1%.
For future surveys, it is recommended to implement a simple random sampling and assume a test sensitivity equal to 0.78, as indicated in the Scientific Opinion on Echinococcus multilocularis infection in animals (EFSA, 2015), section 3.9. In this latter case, the required sample size is equal to 379. The sampling carried out in the Republic of Ireland, given the lack of geographical barrier between the two regions, would provide additional guarantees that Northern Ireland remains disease free this year, even if a lower test sensitivity were used for the sample calculation.
In the Norwegian E. multilocularis surveillance system, a DNA‐fishing technique is used (Isaksson et al., 2014), referred to as PCR 12S rRNA, which involves magnetic capture mtDNA extraction from samples applying specific DNA‐hybridisation (Isaksson et al., 2014), followed by real‐time PCR (CO1rtPCR) (Øines et al., 2014). Samples are also analysed in duplicates in the detection step to increase sensitivity, and to reduce chance of errors introduced by operator. Results from samples with very low target DNA has also shown some false negative which are minimised by running detection in duplicates (Øines et al., 2014). Primers were ‘EMrtCO1F’, ‘EMrtCO1Rew’ and ‘Zen probe’. Following a positive signal, samples are verified with PCR/sequencing confirmation of NAD1 (Trachsel et al., 2007) and an independent real‐time PCR (Taq PCR/12S rDNA real‐time by Isaksson et al., 2014).
Red fox is the target species and practically, the only wild definitive host for E. multilocularis in Norway. There are only tiny populations of wolves and artic foxes, whereas raccoon dogs are only occasionally reported. However, Norway has samples from four wolves (Canis lupus) received for forensic post‐mortem examination during 2015 were tested and all were negative.
The red fox is geographically distributed all over Norway, but the population densities during spring are (roughly estimated) varying from 1 red fox/10 km2 (mountain areas), 3 red foxes/10 km2 (forest/marsh) and 10 red foxes/10 km2 (urban/agricultural areas; e.g. Akershus, Vestfold, Østfold) (Prof. Olav Hjeljord, pers.comm.). There are unfortunately no scientific studies describing the Norwegian red fox population size available in the literature. However, around 21,000 red foxes are hunted annually in Norway (Statistics Norway) and in the absence of better alternatives, this year we have used an updated estimated Norwegian red fox population of 151,000 (previously 70,000) in our surveillance programme. This updated population estimate is provided by Professor Emeritus Olav Hjeljord at the Norwegian University of Life Sciences and is partly based on the spatial distribution of preferred fox habitat and hunting statistics.
EpiTools epidemiological calculators (http://epitools.ausvet.com.au/content.php?page=home), developed by AusVet Animal Health Services, was used to verify that the sample size is sufficient to claim a prevalence of not more than 1% at confidence level of at least 95%. The software use hypergeometric approximation when population size is provided. The goal was approximately 600 samples from red foxes in 2015.
Red fox hunters from across the country were initially invited to participate based on a list obtained from The Norwegian Register of Hunters. In addition, previously participating red fox hunters received invitation to attend the 2015‐sampling season. Hunters were also recruited via the websites of the Norwegian Veterinary Institute and the Norwegian Association for Hunters and Anglers. The red foxes were mainly killed with firearms (shotgun or rifle), but occasionally also caught in traps or killed in traffic accidents, immediately followed by withdrawal of faeces from the rectum. A standard form that included information on where and when the fox had been killed, as well as the sex (male, female) and presumed age of the animal (juvenile, adult), was completed by each hunter. Samples were promptly mailed individually in prepaid envelopes to the laboratory. Upon arrival at the laboratory, samples were frozen at −80°C for at least 3 days before for the analysis commenced. Sampling provided by volunteering hunters is regarded to obtain a representative sampling of the national red fox population and no other superior alternatives of sampling under the demanding, both geographical and climatic, conditions in Norway are considered feasible.
The first case of E. multilocularis was reported from red fox in southern Sweden in late 2011. Consequently, red fox hunters along the border with Sweden in the southern‐eastern part of Norway were encouraged to increase hunting and to submit more samples, since one might argue that the risk of introduction of the parasite to Norway via foxes would increase as a result of this important incident. Habitat use and extent of migration of red foxes in Sweden is, however, not known. This lack of knowledge makes it complicated to assess the potential threat from Swedish foxes. The parasite is now approaching Norway (Uddevalla in Sweden is about 80 km from the Norwegian border). For this reason, the sampling activity is more concentrated along the Swedish borders, without compromising the representativeness of the sample.
Altogether 523 samples were collected from red foxes in 2015 and all were negative in PCR.
Samples were collected throughout 2015 (See Figure 17), from all the 19 Norwegian NUTS3 regions (Figure 18). The spatial distribution of samples is somewhat uneven since the topography of Norway (large areas with mountains) entails scattered settlements and sampling is voluntary performed by hunters that hunt in proximity to their homes.
Using the RiBESS tool under the assumption of a representative sample across mainland Norway as one epidemiological unit and considering a test sensitivity of 0.63, the value of the area sensitivity, was calculated to be > 0.95.
In summary, the set of data relative to the surveillance activity in 2015 ensures the fulfilment of Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011 regarding a confidence level of at least 0.95, against a design prevalence of 1%.
E. multilocularis was not detected in any of the samples.Under the assumption of an unbiased representative sampling and considering the sensitivity of the tests applied, the four MS (Finland, Ireland, Malta and the United Kingdom) and Norway have succeeded in implementing surveillance activities able to detect E. multilocularis at 1% prevalence maximum, with a 95% confidence level, fulfilling the requirement of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011.Obtaining a representative sample from host populations is hampered by the impossibility of implementing a simple random sample in wildlife and the scarcity of knowledge on the distribution of red fox populations at regional level (EFSA, 2015). However, UK and Ireland reports presented the geographical distribution of red fox population density. Ireland geographically distributed the tested samples based on the red fox density per NUTS3 region with the aim of reducing potential geographical sampling bias.A risk‐based approach is legally accepted and theoretically applicable. In practice, however, it is extremely difficult because even if relevant relative risk values may be found in scientific literature, they may not apply to and are not validated for the country and populations in question.Political borders do not necessarily match with the epidemiologically relevant units as they do not provide a barrier for wildlife EM hosts (EFSA, 2015). As there is no physical boundary between Northern Ireland and Ireland to prevent fox movement, surveillance for the disease free status of the fox population of the isle of Ireland as a whole would be epidemiologically correct and would reduce the total resources currently used for sampling and testing the two identities. In other words, the identification of epidemiologically relevant units should be considered independent from the political borders (EFSA, 2015).All four MS and Norway participated in the EURLP 2015 ring trial, to assess the ability of the laboratory to detect E. multilocularis.
Collaboration between epidemiologists and wildlife experts would facilitate data collection and subsequent estimation of wildlife population parameters (e.g. the density and local distribution, age structure and gender distribution). The density distribution should be reflected in the sampling strategy or in the composition of a composite sample.
Studies to improve the knowledge on epidemiological risk factors, including geographical risk factors, should be encouraged to enable well‐founded risk‐based sampling in geographical subpopulations of hosts to improve the detection (EFSA, 2015).
Routine surveillance to substantiate the absence of EM in domestic dogs is not scientifically justified in countries where no definitive wildlife hosts are present. Such countries, e.g. Malta, do not need to carry out surveillance on domestic dogs to substantiate EM‐freedom. The option of making the treatment non‐compulsory anymore for dogs entering such country is a public health issue and relates to the risk of humans getting infected by the parasite by means of contaminated dog faeces (EFSA, 2015).
A study should be undertaken to estimate the probability of each relevant test to detect infection, given that the animal is truly infected (according to the definition of test sensitivity), using an adequate sample of specimens from endemic areas where the entire range of different infection stages and intensities are represented. Such a study should follow the OIE Terrestrial Manual, Chapter 1.1.5 (OIE, 2012), and could be coordinated by the EURL for Parasites (EFSA, 2015).
Until better documentation is available or as an alternative, for future surveys, the diagnostic sensitivity should be set conservatively to the lowest value, excluding the lowest 20th percentile, from the ones reported in the scientific literature and related to the diagnostic tests implemented by the countries listed under Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 1152/2011. In this case, the suggested value to be used for future surveys is 78% (EFSA, 2015).
Alveolar echinococcosis (AE)The human disease caused by infection with the larval stage (metacestode) of E. multilocularis. It is characterised by infiltrative, tumour‐like growth, initially in the liver, potentially causing high fatality rates.EFSA Data Collection Framework (DCF)The EFSA web interface accessible by most common web browsers through which data providers can submit their files. The system provides automatic feedback on errors in structure and content, and confirmation of successful submissions.Enzyme‐linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)The test that applies the immunological concept of an antigen binding to its specific antibody, which allows detection of very small quantities of antigens such as proteins, peptides, hormones, or antibody in a fluid sample, utilising enzyme‐labelled antibodies or antigens and a chromogenic substrate for the enzyme to detect the target molecules.NUTSThe Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS), or in French Nomenclature Unités Territoriales Statistiques, is a geocode standard for referencing the administrative divisions of countries for statistical purposes. The standard was developed by the European Union and subdivides the territory of the European Union into regions at three different levels (NUTS 1, 2 and 3, moving from larger to smaller territorial units (see also http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/Glossary:NUTS).Odds Ratio (OR)The ratio of the odds of an event occurring in one group to the odds of it occurring in another group. It estimates the probability of the event given exposure to a specific factor by measuring the probability of exposure given the presence of the event.Risk‐based Estimate of System Sensitivity (RiBESS) toolThe Microsoft Excel based tool developed by EFSA for the calculation of the sample size needed to substantiate absence of a given disease and/or to calculate the survey sensitivity (confidence) once the samples have been collected.Sedimentation and Counting Technique (SCT)The technique for the quantitative assessment of the E. multilocularis burden of foxes or other definitive hosts, where intestinal material is washed and sedimented several times and the resulting sediment is examined under a stereomicroscope for the presence of the parasite.
AFBIAgri‐Food and Biosciences InstituteASearea sensitivityCLconfidence levelDCFEFSA Data Collection FrameworkEFTAEuropean Free Trade Association Em Echinococcus multilocularis GBGreat Britain (including England, Wales and Scotland)ISTintestinal scraping techniqueNtarget population sizeNINorthern IrelandORodds ratioPCRpolymerase Chain ReactionRRrelative riskSCCSpecies Survival CommissionSCTsedimentation and counting techniqueSesensitivitySSesystem sensitivitySpspecificityTSetest sensitivityToRTerms of ReferenceUKUnited Kingdom (including Great Britain and Northern Ireland)