SUMMARYThe mammary epithelium undergoes extensive growth and remodeling during pregnancy, suggesting a role for stem cells. Yet their origin, identity, and behavior in the intact tissue remain unknown. Using an Axin2CreERT2 allele, we labeled and traced Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells throughout mammary gland development. This reveals a switch in Wnt/β-catenin signaling around birth and shows that, depending on the developmental stage, Axin2+ cells contribute differently to basal and luminal epithelial cell lineages of the mammary epithelium. Moreover, an important difference exists between the developmental potential tested in transplantation assays and that displayed by the same cell population in situ. Finally, Axin2+ cells in the adult build alveolar structures during multiple pregnancies, demonstrating the existence of a Wnt/β-catenin-responsive adult stem cell. Our study uncovers dynamic changes in Wnt/β-catenin signaling in the mammary epithelium and offers insights into the developmental fate of mammary gland stem and progenitor cells.

The mammary gland harbors extraordinary proliferative and differentiation potential. This is illustrated by the rapid growth and extensive branching morphogenesis displayed during puberty, when the rudimentary ductal tree invades the surrounding stromal tissue to form the elaborate epithelial network that makes up the adult mammary gland parenchyma (Richert et al., 2000; Watson and Khaled, 2008). Even more striking is the proliferative capacity retained by the adult mammary epithelium, allowing dynamic tissue remodeling during pregnancy and lactation. This encompasses a massive expansion in cell number and the formation of milk-producing alveoli. Once lactation ceases, the alveolar structures regress in a process called involution, and the mammary gland returns to a prepregnancy-like state. Most remarkably, the cycle of pregnancy, lactation, and involution can repeat itself multiple times during the reproductive lifespan of an animal, suggesting that stem cells are present to ensure proper long-term maintenance of mammary tissue structure and function.
It is well accepted that stem cells do indeed exist in the adult mammary epithelium (reviewed by Visvader, 2009; Visvader and Smith, 2011). Over the last 50 years, the capacity to regenerate a ductal tree upon transplantation into the cleared fat pad has become the gold standard for analyzing stem cell potential (Daniel et al., 1968; Deome et al., 1959; Smith and Medina, 1988). The finding that cells with enhanced regenerative potential could be prospectively isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) based on their Lin−;CD24+;CD29hi (Shackleton et al., 2006) or Lin−;CD24+;CD49fhi (Stingl et al., 2006) profile represented a major advance in the field. However, the regenerative potential tested in transplantation experiments does not necessarily reflect physiological behavior and cell fate in situ (Van Keymeulen et al., 2011). Consequently, true insight into stem cell origin and function in a normal developmental context can only be gained from lineage tracing analyses. For the mammary gland, this approach has long remained unexplored and key questions regarding the origin, identity, and behavior of mammary stem and progenitor cells remain.
Wnt/β-catenin signaling is instrumental for stem cell maintenance in multiple tissues and critical for mammary gland development and function. It is first required for mammary placode formation during embryogenesis (Chu et al., 2004; Veltmaat et al., 2004). In postnatal life, Wnt/β-catenin signaling controls branching morphogenesis and alveolar bud formation, as well as early lobuloalveolar development during pregnancy (Brisken et al., 2000; Kim et al., 2009; Lindvall et al., 2009; Macias et al., 2011; Teulière et al., 2005).
Axin2 has been well established as a direct target gene of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway (Jho et al., 2002; Lustig et al., 2002). Moreover, we have previously demonstrated that Axin2+ cells have regenerative capacity in mammary gland transplantation experiments (Zeng and Nusse, 2010). Based on this, we used Axin2 as a functional stem cell marker to study the contribution of Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells to mammary gland development and differentiation using a lineage tracing approach. For this purpose, we have generated a mouse model, Axin2CreERT2, which allows us to mark these cells at different time points in situ and to track their behavior across distinct developmental stages.
We generated an Axin2CreERT2 allele by knocking a tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase (CreERT2) into the endogenous Axin2 gene (Figure 1A). Axin2CreERT2/+ mice derived from embryonic stem cells that had undergone homologous recombination at the Axin2 locus (Figure 1B) were crossed to the Rosa26-lacZ (R26RlacZ) and Rosa26-mT/mG (R26RmTmG) reporter strains (Muzumdar et al., 2007; Soriano, 1999). Upon administration of tamoxifen (TM), Cre activity in Axin2CreERT2/+;R26RlacZ/+ or Axin2CreERT2/+;R26RmTmG/+ mice results in sporadic recombination of the floxed reporter loci, leaving behind a permanent, genetic mark in the form of persistent lacZ expression (Figure 1C; in R26RlacZ/+) or a switch from membrane-bound dTomato to membrane-bound green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression (Figure 1D; in R26RmTmG/+). Not only does the recombined cell carry this label for the remainder of its lifespan, it also passes the expression of lacZ or GFP on to its offspring, thereby allowing the developmental fate of the Wnt/β-catenin-responsive lineage to be traced.
As a proof of principle, we tested the ability of Axin2CreERT2 to mark stem cells in the intestinal epithelium. This tissue turns over every 3–7 days, and Wnt/β-catenin-responsive stem cells at the bottom of the intestinal crypt are critical for its maintenance (Korinek et al., 1998; Muncan et al., 2006; Van der Flier et al., 2007). It was previously demonstrated that after Cre-mediated recombination of a floxed reporter allele, these stem cells give rise to entirely labeled crypt/villus units that persist for long periods of time (Barker et al., 2007). In agreement with these published data, we find that Axin2CreERT2 initially marks cells at the crypt base (see Figures S1A–S1D available online). Within a week, the offspring of these cells have migrated up along the crypt/villus axis, resulting in ribbons of labeled cells that run from the bottom of the crypt to the tip of the villus (Figures 1C′ and 1D′). Recombined cells persist up to 350 days (Figures S1E–S1H and data not shown), which is well beyond the lifespan of the intestinal epithelium, thus demonstrating that Axin2CreERT2 marks intestinal stem cells.
The earliest signs of mammary placode formation are the localized expression of Wnt10b and corresponding activity of Wnt/β-catenin reporter gene expression (Al Alam et al., 2011; Chu et al., 2004; Veltmaat et al., 2004). Indeed, we detected robust expression of Axin2lacZ in mammary placodes of embryonic day (E) 12.5 embryos (Figures 2A and 2B). To study the contribution of these Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells to mammary gland development, we administered TM to pregnant females at E12.5 (Figures 2C–2F), E14.5 (Figures 2G–2I), or E17.5 (data not shown) and analyzed the mammary glands from female offspring once these mice had reached adulthood.
Using whole-mount confocal fluorescence microscopy, we identified large, GFP+ cell clones (0–2 per gland) in the otherwise dTomato+ mammary epithelium of Axin2CreERT2/+;R26RmTmG/+ mice. These clones extended to the most distal tips of the branched ductal network (Figures 2D and 2I). Within these clones, GFP+ cells were restricted to the luminal cell fate, as confirmed by costaining with basal (K14) and luminal (K8) markers as well as by FACS analysis (Figures 2E, 2F, and 1J–2M; n = 5 mice analyzed in total). A similar picture was observed regardless of whether recombination was induced at E12.5, E14.5, or E17.5. Thus, we conclude that Wnt/β-catenin signaling in the embryonic mammary bud marks the prospective luminal cell lineage and that even within the mammary placode, some cells with elevated Axin2 expression are already luminal specified.
Relatively little is known about the role of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in early postnatal development, but Axin2lacZ reporter activity can be detected in rare cells associated with primary and secondary ducts of the rudimentary mammary epithelium in 2-week-old mice (Figures 3A–3C). To probe the contribution of these Axin2+ cells to the expanding epithelial network, we injected prepubescent (postnatal days 14–16 [P14–P16]) mice with TM. Mice were then allowed to develop through puberty into adulthood, at which point mammary glands were analyzed for the presence of labeled cells (Figure 3D). A single dose of TM resulted in only a few lacZ+ or GFP+ cell clusters in Axin2CreERT2/+;R26RlacZ/+ or Axin2CreERT2/+;R26RmTmG/+ animals (Figures 3E–3K and Figure S3), demonstrating that the descendants of Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells in the prepubescent mammary gland undergo massive proliferation during puberty and become incorporated into the basal layer of the adult mammary epithelium. Remarkably, lacZ+ or GFP+ cells were deposited along the entire length of the ductal network, including the most distal tips (Figures 3F and 3I). This suggests that labeled cells retain their basal cell fate even while migrating at the leading edge of the epithelial ducts during puberty.
FACS analysis confirmed the basal cell fate of the prepubescent Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cell lineage (Figures 3L–3O). In all cases, GFP+ cells made up a larger proportion of the Lin−; CD24+;CD29hi basal (Figure 3N; 2.9% ± 1.8%, n = 14 animals) than of the Lin−;CD24hi;CD29+ luminal cell population (Figure 3N; 0.2% ± 0.3%, n = 14 animals), with not a single GFP+ cell being detected in the luminal population in 7/14 animals. However, the majority of GFP+ cells (Figure 3O; 67.2% ± 14.2%, 1,257 out of 1,964 GFP+ events) probably represent stromal cells, as they fell into neither the gated basal (Figure 3O; 30.8% ± 13.8%, 659 out of 1,964 GFP+ events) nor the gated luminal (Figure 3O; 2.1% ± 3.7%, 48 out of 1,964 GFP+ events) cell population.
Taken together, the embryonic (Figure 2) and prepuberty (Figure 3) tracing experiments suggest that a previously unrecognized switch in Wnt/β-catenin signaling activity takes place around birth. As a result, Axin2 expression marks the prospective luminal lineage between E12.5 and E17.5 but the basal lineage between P14 and P16.
We next sought to test the fate of the prepubescent Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cell lineage during pregnancy (Figure 4A). After recombination at P14 and analysis of midpregnant animals, we observed labeled cells that retained the appearance of basal, myoepithelial cells around developing alveoli (Figures 4B and 4C). Importantly, the majority of the gland did not contain labeled cells in the epithelium (Figure 4D), indicating that labeled cell clusters surrounding the alveoli are the clonal offspring of a single recombination event (Buckingham and Meilhac, 2011). Thus, the Wnt/β-catenin-responsive lineage marked in the prepubescent mammary gland undergoes proliferation as the epithelial network expands during puberty and pregnancy but remains restricted to the basal cell fate.
Upon weaning of the offspring, the mammary gland undergoes massive tissue remodeling. The alveolar structures regress as a result of widespread apoptosis and clearance of milk-secreting cells. To determine whether the Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells in the prepubescent mammary gland classify as stem cells, we tested whether they survived multiple rounds of tissue turnover. By tracing their fate across multiple pregnancies (Figures 4E–4G), we found that these cells were long lived and continued to proliferate and increase in number with each subsequent gestation. This resulted in large areas, comprising multiple alveolar clusters, being cupped by the clonal offspring of a recombined cell in an otherwise unlabeled mammary epithelium (Figures 4F and 4G). Within these clusters, however, labeled cells were still restricted to the basal layer (Figures 4G′ and 4G″). From this, we conclude that Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells in the basal layer of the prepubescent mammary gland are unipotent stem cells that retain long-term proliferative potential.
Given that the descendants of prepubescent Axin2+ cells did not adopt luminal cell fates in lineage tracing experiments, we hypothesized that they would also be unlikely to give rise to a new ductal tree after transplantation into the cleared fat pad. To test this, we prepared mammary cell suspensions from 9- to 13-week-old Axin2CreERT2/+;R26RmTmG/+ mice that had received TM between P14 and P16. GFP+ cells were sorted from the basal Lin−;CD24+;CD29hi population by flow cytometry, after which their regenerative potential was analyzed in transplantation assays.
Surprisingly, these cells were highly efficient at regenerating a new ductal tree. As few as 50 cells were able to give rise to GFP+ outgrowths with normal basal and luminal layers, which was fully capable of developing alveoli during pregnancy (Figures 4H and 4I, Table S1, and data not shown). Moreover, when we reisolated the (now entirely GFP+) Lin−;CD24+;CD29hi basal cells from these primary outgrowths, they were also able to regenerate a mammary gland in secondary transplantation experiments (data not shown). Thus, we conclude that transplantation into the cleared fat pad unlocks a regenerative potential that is not utilized during normal developmental conditions.
Predominant outgrowth of the mammary epithelium occurs during puberty, when branching morphogenesis and elongation of the ductal tree are driven by specialized, rapidly dividing terminal end bud (TEB) structures. By the time the mouse reaches adulthood, the epithelial network has invaded the entire stromal fat pad and the TEBs regress. Multiple Wnt-pathway genes, including ligands and receptors, are expressed by either the TEB itself or by the surrounding stroma (Kouros-Mehr and Werb, 2006), suggesting that Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells contribute to outgrowth of the mammary epithelial network during puberty.
To test this hypothesis, we first analyzed the expression pattern of Axin2lacZ reporter mice at P28, when puberty has commenced and the TEBs have formed. In whole-mount preparations of X-gal-stained mammary glands, Axin2lacZ expression was most prominently detected in a zone of stroma surrounding the neck region of the TEBs (Figure 5A). However, in histological tissue sections, Axin2lacZ expression was also apparent in the epithelium itself, both in rare TEB body cells (arrow in Figure 5B) and in basal cells more proximal to the TEB (arrowheads in Figure 5B). A similar picture was observed in pubescent Axin2CreERT2 mice that were analyzed 2–3 days after TM administration in conjunction with either the R26RlacZ (data not shown) or the R26RmTmG reporter (Figure 5C).
Next, we tracked the developmental fate of these Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells by administering a single dose of TM to pubescent Axin2CreERT2/+;R26RmTmG/+ mice and analyzing the contribution of labeled cells to the mature epithelial network once the mice had reached adulthood (Figure 5D). In 10- to 12-week-old virgins, the offspring of Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells could be visualized as GFP+ tracts (Figures 5E and 5F) that had become incorporated into both basal (inset in Figure 5E) and luminal (Figure 5F) layers of the ductal epithelium. During pregnancy, the offspring of Axin2+ cells that were labeled at puberty underwent massive clonal expansion, forming distinct clusters of either basal or luminal alveolar cells (Figures 5H–5M). Taken together, these data demonstrate that during puberty, Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells give rise to both basal and luminal cell lineages of the expanding epithelial network. However, given the appearance of independent basal and luminal cell clones during pregnancy, the bilayered ductal epithelium is likely to arise from independent basal and luminal precursors, both of which are Axin2+ during puberty.
By initiating lineage tracing experiments in embryos, prepubescent, or pubescent mice, we were able to establish that Axin2+ cells contribute differently to basal and luminal cell lineages of the mammary gland depending on the developmental stage of the tissue. We next sought to resolve the role of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in the adult mammary gland, where the hierarchy and origin of the stem cells that build alveoli during pregnancy remain ill understood.
Axin2lacZ is expressed by a small proportion of basal cells in the adult mammary epithelium (Zeng and Nusse, 2010). Using confocal microscopy, we imaged the glands from 9-week-old virgin Axin2CreERT2/+;R26RmTmG/+ mice that had been injected with TM 48 hr prior. Analysis of GFP-expression in conjunction with basal and luminal markers confirmed that recombined cells resided in the basal layer (Figures 6A and 6B).
When we administered a high dose of TM to adult virgin mice and analyzed the mammary glands by whole-mount confocal microscopy 2 weeks after recombination, we also observed labeled cells with the appearance of elongated myoepithelial cells along the primary and secondary ducts (arrows in Figure 6C). In addition, GFP+ cells surrounded the lateral, or alveolar, buds (arrowheads in top panel of Figure 6C), which go on to form tertiary branches and secretory alveoli during pregnancy. Finally, labeled cells cradled the end buds at the distal tip of the epithelium (arrowheads in bottom panel of Figure 6C).
We next analyzed the mammary glands from a total of 13 animals, all of which received TM as adult virgins between the ages of 8–10 weeks, by flow cytometry (Figures 6D–6G). Irrespective of the length of the trace (ranging from 48 hr to 66 days after TM administration), we consistently observed a higher percentage of GFP+ cells in the Lin−;CD24+;CD29hi basal cell population (Figure 6F; 5.2% ± 2.9%, n = 13 animals) than in the bulk of Lin− cells (Figure 6F; 2.0% ± 1.2%, n = 13 animals). Conversely, GFP+ cells in the Lin−;CD24hi;CD29+ luminal cell population were rare (Figure 6F; 0.2% ± 0.2%, n = 13 animals), with not a single GFP+ cell being detected in the luminal population in 5/13 animals. On average, basal cells made up approximately half of the total number of labeled cells (Figure 6G; 53.9% ± 16.7%, 1,176 out of 1,969 GFP+ events). Only a small fraction (Figure 6G; 1.5% ± 1.9%, 23 out of 1,969 GFP+ events) of the GFP+ cells fell into the luminal cell population. The remainder (Figure 6G; 44.6% ± 17.3%) mostly express low levels of CD24 (Figure 6E) and are likely to be stromal fibroblasts, which also express Axin2 as determined by histological analyses (data not shown). Taken together, these analyses demonstrate that in the adult, Axin2CreERT2 preferentially marks cells in the basal Lin−;CD24+;CD29hi mammary epithelial cell population, corroborating our previous results obtained with Axin2lacZ reporter mice. Moreover, cells marked by Axin2CreERT2 remain localized to the basal layer of the adult virgin mammary epithelium as long as the tissue remains quiescent.
Transplantation assays with GFP+ Lin−;CD24+;CD29hi cells marked by Axin2CreERT2 in the adult virgin demonstrated that these cells were able to regenerate an entire epithelial network with great efficiency (summarized in Table S1 and Figure S4). However, both our own (Figures 4H and 4I) and recently published data (Van Keymeulen et al., 2011) demonstrate that transplantation into the cleared fat pad does not reflect the normal developmental potential of a mammary gland stem cell in its natural environment. We therefore tested the fate of these cells during pregnancy. Little remains known about how adult mammary stem cells function in vivo to build the specialized alveolar structures. In particular, the existence of a bipotent adult stem cell that could give rise to both basal and luminal alveolar cells remains contested.
To track the fate of Axin2+ cells in the adult, we injected 8-week-old virgins with a single dose of TM and, starting 1 week after recombination, performed timed matings to induce pregnancy (Figure 6H). At day 14.5 of gestation, the vast majority of the mammary epithelium was lacZ− or GFP−, confirming that TM administration had resulted in sporadic recombination of the floxed reporter alleles. A few regions, however, harbored dense areas of labeled cells (Figures 6I and 6J and Figure S5). Whereas GFP+ cells remained restricted to the basal layer along the main ducts, alveoli also contained GFP+ luminal alveolar cells, which differentiate to produce and secrete milk toward the end of pregnancy (Figures 6K and 6L). Of note, within these GFP+ clusters, we were able to detect adjacent GFP+ luminal (K8-positive) and basal (K14-positive) cells (Figures S5 and S6).
Thus, lineage tracing demonstrates that Axin2+ cells in the adult virgin mammary epithelium contribute to both basal and luminal cells in the alveoli that arise during the first pregnancy. Moreover, individual lacZ+ or GFP+ cell clusters are separated by large stretches of unlabeled epithelium, suggesting that they are the clonal offspring of a single recombination event (Buckingham and Meilhac, 2011).
To track the fate of adult Axin2+ cells across multiple rounds of pregnancy, we administered TM to adult virgin mice. These were then allowed to complete up to three cycles of pregnancy, lactation, and involution, after which mammary glands were analyzed for the presence of labeled cells.
After two complete cycles of pregnancy (~15–16 weeks after TM administration) mammary glands from multiparous Axin2CreERT2/+;R26RlacZ/+ mice were easily discernable from their nulliparous counterparts (Figures S7A–S7C). Although involution is generally considered to be complete after approximately 2 weeks (Richert et al., 2000; Strange et al., 1992), even after 21 days of involution, the mammary glands from multiparous animals had a far more disordered appearance than those of nulliparous littermates. The epithelial network was denser, with an obvious increase in tertiary branches and remnants of alveoli (arrows in Figures S7B and S7C). Labeled cells were found to persist in both nulliparous and multiparous animals. In nulliparous mice, they could sometimes be seen as tracts of lacZ+ cells that ran along the epithelial duct (arrowhead in Figure S7B). In other cases, both nulliparous and multiparous littermates contained dense clusters of labeled cells in a subset of the smaller branches (arrowheads in Figure S7C), potentially reflecting the generation of new side branches that sprout from existing ducts with recurrent estrous cycles (Andres and Strange, 1999; Brisken, 2002). Multiparous Axin2CreERT2/+;R26RlacZ/+ mice also contained lacZ+ regions of regressing alveoli (Figure S7D).
A similar picture was observed in Axin2CreERT2/+;R26RmTmG/+ mice, in which labeled cells still contributed to the building of alveolar clusters during the third pregnancy (Figure 6N). Within these clusters, we were again able to detect adjacent GFP+ basal (K14-positive) and luminal (K8-positive) cells (Figure 6O and Figures S7E–S7M). Finally, labeled cells remained present 21 days after weaning of the third litter (~22 weeks after TM administration), when remnants of alveoli were still being cleared (Figure 6P). Upon analyzing the distribution of GFP+ cells in the different mammary cell populations, we observed large variation in the amount of GFP+ luminal Lin−;CD24hi;CD29+ cells among mice that had been traced for more than 20 weeks, irrespective of their parity status (data not shown). However, the percentage of GFP+ basal Lin−;CD24+;CD29hi cells was comparable between nulliparous littermates (4.1% ± 3.1%, n = 3 animals) and mice that had completed three cycles of pregnancy and involution (5.3% ± 1.6%, n = 3 animals; Figure 6Q). Thus, Axin2+ cells in the basal layer of the adult mammary gland are able to self-renew.
Because Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells in the adult virgin mammary gland survive the complete turnover of the lobuloalveolar compartment as defined by the dynamic remodeling of the mammary epithelium that occurs postpregnancy, we conclude that Axin2CreERT2 marks long-lived adult mammary gland stem cells. These cells form the building blocks of alveolar structures during multiple rounds of pregnancy. The fact that labeled basal and luminal cells can be detected side by side within the same cell cluster during multiple pregnancies suggests a clonal relationship between the two and implies that one bipotent Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cell can generate an entire alveolar structure.
Much effort has been put into delineating the relationships between different epithelial cell populations in the mammary gland. This has resulted in two models, each of which proposes a hierarchy of stem and progenitor cells in the mammary epithelium (Visvader, 2009; Visvader and Smith, 2011). The first of these models assumes the existence of independent ductal and lobular progenitors, both of which have the capacity to give rise to basal as well as luminal offspring. This model is mostly based on (serial) transplantation experiments with limiting amounts of cells, which sometimes results in lobule-limited or duct-limited outgrowths (Bruno and Smith, 2011; Kamiya et al., 1998; Kordon and Smith, 1998; Smith, 1996). A second model instead proposes an early separation between the basal and luminal cell lineages. Mainly based on in vitro colony formation assays (Stingl et al., 1998), it predicts, among others, the existence of a myoepithelial progenitor. This model is supported by recent lineage tracing experiments, which demonstrated that during puberty both the myoepithelial and the luminal lineage contain long-lived, unipotent stem cells (Van Keymeulen et al., 2011).
Wnt/β-catenin signaling controls various aspects of mammary gland development and differentiation during both embryogenesis and postnatal life and is critical for stem cell maintenance and function in multiple tissues. Thus, Axin2 is both a direct transcriptional target of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway (Lustig et al., 2002) and a defined stem cell marker. We show that Axin2 is expressed by only a subset of epithelial cells in the postnatal mammary gland epithelium. By labeling these cells at different developmental time points, our study reveals important conceptual points regarding the origin and behavior of mammary gland stem cells.
First, we observe dynamic changes in Axin2 expression and the corresponding fate of Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells depending on the time of TM administration (summarized in Figure 7). Most striking in this regard is the switch in Wnt/β-catenin signaling that occurs around the time of birth. Whereas Axin2+ cells in the embryo mark the prospective luminal cell lineage (Figure 2), Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells have become exclusively committed to the basal cell fate in 2-week-old pups (Figure 3).
Although the mammary gland is generally considered to be relatively quiescent in early postnatal life, this observation suggests that important cell fate decisions do in fact occur during this period. For instance, it is at this point that the unipotent, Wnt/β-catenin-responsive myoepithelial stem cells (Figures 3 and 4) are specified. Importantly, the offspring of these prepubescent Axin2+ cells remain restricted to the basal cell fate during pregnancy, when they expand in number and give rise to large clusters of contractile, myoepithelial cells that surround the alveoli. Finally, these cells survive multiple rounds of pregnancy and involution, demonstrating their potential for long-term self-renewal.
Whereas only the basal lineage is Wnt/β-catenin-responsive prior to the onset of puberty, Axin2+ cells arise de novo in TEBs, where they mark the prospective luminal lineage (Figure 5). Together, these findings support a model in which two Wnt/β-catenin-responsive lineages arise in consecutive order to give rise to independent basal and luminal cell lineages during puberty. This is in agreement with a recent publication by Van Keymeulen and colleagues, although at present it remains unknown how far the Axin2+ prepubescent and pubescent cell lineages we identified overlap with the K14+ and K8+ lineages marked during puberty by the Cre- and rtTA-transgenic lines used in that study (Van Keymeulen et al., 2011).
By directly comparing the behavior of the same cell population in transplantation and lineage tracing experiments, we uncovered important differences between a cell′s regenerative and normal developmental potential. As shown in Figure 4, the prepubescent Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cell lineage is restricted to the basal cell fate throughout puberty and multiple rounds of pregnancy. Yet in spite of this, these cells are fully capable of regenerating both basal and luminal layers upon (serial) transplantation. Interestingly, it was recently demonstrated that basal Lin−;CD24+;CD29hi cells only adopt a multipotent fate in transplantation assays when they are transplanted in the complete absence or with a limiting amount of luminal Lin−;CD24hi;CD29+ cells (Van Keymeulen et al., 2011).
One explanation for the apparent discrepancy between the developmental and regenerative potential of these cells might be that in a normal developmental context they fulfill a role as facultative stem cells. As such, their multipotent potential might be recruited only as needed, for instance, after tissue damage. However, in light of published reports that even progenitor cells of a completely different origin can be reprogrammed by the microenvironment of the fat pad to adopt a mammary cell fate (Booth et al., 2008; Boulanger et al., 2012), there is also the distinct possibility that transplantation unlocks a regenerative potential that is normally not utilized in vivo. In either case, these results argue that lineage tracing should become the new standard by which to measure normal developmental stem cell potential.
Cumulative work in the field has long suggested a (supra)basal location for the adult mammary stem cell (Chepko and Smith, 1997; Shackleton et al., 2006; Smith et al., 2002). While this cell is assumed to give rise to alveolar structures during pregnancy, its existence has not been formally demonstrated. In fact, recently published lineage tracing experiments suggest that basal and luminal alveolar cells can derive from independent precursors that are set aside during or prior to the onset of puberty (Van Keymeulen et al., 2011). Indeed, our own data demonstrate the specification of a unipotent, Wnt/β-catenin-responsive basal stem cell in prepubescent mice. As a result, the existence of a bipotent adult stem cell remains contested.
The only way to directly probe its existence, however, is to induce recombination in the adult virgin mammary gland and track the fate of these labeled cells through multiple rounds of pregnancy, lactation, and involution. We performed this experiment by administering TM to adult virgin mice and analyzing the contribution of Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells to the formation of alveoli. Interestingly, we observed clonal GFP+ clusters containing adjacent labeled basal and luminal alveolar cells. These cells are long lived and continue to give rise to both basal and luminal offspring in subsequent pregnancies, demonstrating that Axin2 is a stem cell marker for both the basal and luminal lineage in the adult mammary epithelium. It is a formal possibility that these GFP+ basal and luminal alveolar cells arose from independent basal and luminal precursors, in which case Axin2 would mark the long-sought-after adult luminal stem cell. However, we consider this to be unlikely for a number of reasons.
First, while we are able to detect a tiny fraction of GFP+ cells in the luminal cell population by FACS analysis after TM administration to adult virgin mice (Figure 6E), the gated cell populations are not pure and these rare GFP+ cells could therefore represent carryover from basal or stromal cell populations. This is supported by the fact that we observe a similar percentage of GFP+ cells in the luminal cell population when recombination is induced in prepubescent mice (Figure 3M), yet we never find prepubescent Axin2+ cells to give rise to luminal alveolar cells in lineage tracing experiments, even after multiple pregnancies.
Second, after administering TM to adult virgin Axin2CreERT2/+; R26RmTmG/+ mice, we detect labeled cells in the basal layer by microscopic analyses. This is in agreement with published data showing enrichment for Wnt/β-catenin pathway receptor components in basal cells (Kendrick et al., 2008), as well as with our earlier observation that Axin2lacZ is expressed by cells in the basal layer of the adult virgin mammary gland (Zeng and Nusse, 2010).
Finally, given the low frequency of labeled cell clusters during pregnancy, the finding of adjacent GFP+ basal and luminal alveolar cells within the same cluster (Figures S5–S7) suggests that these cells are likely to be descendants of a common precursor. Thus, our data support a model in which Axin2CreERT2 marks a bipotent adult stem cell, suggesting that unipotent and multipotent stem cells might coexist in the mammary epithelium. Ruling out that independent basal and luminal adult stem cells are Axin2+ positive requires further experimentation using combinations of more specific stem cell and lineage markers. In either case, we can definitively conclude that Wnt/β-catenin-responsive cells in the adult virgin mammary epithelium are long-lived stem cells that survive multiple rounds of lobuloalveolar tissue turnover. In future studies, it will be of particular interest to determine the relationship of these Axin2+ adult mammary stem cells to the K14+, K8+, and Lgr5+ cell populations labeled during puberty (Van Keymeulen et al., 2011; Visvader and Lindeman, 2011) as well as to the previously described self-renewing population of parity-identified mammary epithelial cells (Boulanger et al., 2005; Wagner et al., 2002).
To generate mice expressing CreERT2 under control of the endogenous Axin2 promoter and enhancer sequences, we modified the original targeting construct used to generate Axin2lacZ mice (Lustig et al., 2002). See Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details.
Rosa26-lacZ (R26RlacZ; stock 3474) and Rosa26-mTmG (R26RmTmG; stock 7676) reporter mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories. Axin2lacZ mice were a gift from Dr. W. Birchmeier. Nude mice (Nu/Nu; stock 088) were obtained from Charles River. All experiments were approved by the Stanford University Animal Care and Use Committee and performed according to NIH guidelines.
Unless otherwise indicated, mice received a single intraperitoneal injection of a 10–20 mg/ml stock solution of tamoxifen (TM) in corn oil/10% ethanol, totaling 4 mg/25 g body weight. This corresponds to a total dose of 1 mg TM for prepubescent mice (injected between P14 and P16), 2 mg TM for pubescent mice (injected between P28 and P35), and 4 mg TM for adult virgins (injected between P56 and P63). To induce sporadic recombination in embryos, we gave a single injection of TM to pregnant mothers between E12.5 and E17.5, totaling 0.5 mg/25 g body weight.
See Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details on the whole-mount analyses of fluorescent and X-gal-stained mammary glands, as well as for details on the X-gal staining procedure.
PFA-fixed or ethanol-fixed samples were embedded in paraffin according to standard techniques. Tissues were sectioned on a Leica Microtome. Individual sections (2–5 μm for X-gal-stained samples, 10 μm for R26RmTmG samples) were mounted onto superfrost slides and dried overnight at 37°C. For paraffin fixed samples, antigen retrieval was performed in Tris/EDTA (pH 9.0). Sections were stained with antibodies recognizing keratin 14 (K14, 1:500, Covance), smooth muscle actin (SMA, 1:1,000, Sigma), keratin 8 (K8, 1:250, Troma-1, DSHB), laminin (1:250, Sigma), and GFP (1:1,000, Abcam). They were processed for immunofluorescence (with Alexa 488- or Cy3- or Cy5-conjugated secondary antibodies, Jackson Immunoresearch) or immunohistochemistry (with the Vectastain ABC system and DAB substrate, Vector Laboratories) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The dTomato signal was lost when tissues were processed for routine paraffin embedding and histology, enabling us to use both the Cy3 and the Cy5 channel for the detection of fluorescently labeled antibodies against the different markers.
Mammary epithelial cells were stained with a cocktail of antibodies directed against Ter119, CD31, CD45, CD24, CD29, and CD49f, followed by analysis and sorting on a BD Facs Aria (Beckton Dickinson). To test their mammary repopulating behavior, we injected sorted GFP+ Lin−;CD24+;CD29hi cells into the cleared fat pad of 21-day-old nude recipient mice. Outgrowths were analyzed 4–8 weeks after transplantation. MRU frequencies were calculated using L-calc software (Stem Cell Technologies). See Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details on the cell isolation, staining, and transplantation procedures.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information for this article includes seven figures, one table, and Supplemental Experimental Procedures and can be found with this article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2012.05.023.