AbstractThis scientific opinion of the EFSA Panel on Food Contact Materials, Enzymes, Flavourings and Processing Aids (CEF Panel) deals with the safety assessment of the polyacrylic acid, sodium salt, cross‐linked, food contact material (FCM) substance No 1015, which is intended to be used as a liquid absorber in the packaging of fresh or frozen foods, such as meat, poultry, seafood, fruits and vegetables. Specific migration tests were not performed due to the high absorption of liquids by the substance. The Panel noted that if polyacrylic acid, sodium salt, cross‐linked, is not in direct contact with the food but is placed in a pad and used under conditions where its absorption capacity is not exceeded, then no migration is to be expected and therefore no exposure from the consumption of the packed food is expected. The CEF Panel concluded that the use of this polyacrylic acid, sodium salt, cross‐linked, does not raise a safety concern when used in absorbent pads in the packaging of fresh or frozen meat, poultry, fish, fruits and vegetables. The absorbent pads must be used only under conditions in which the absorption capacity of the active substance is not exceeded and direct contact between the substance and the food is excluded.

Regulation (EC) No 450/20091 of the Commission of European Communities is a specific measure that lays down specific rules for active and intelligent materials and articles intended for contact with foodstuffs in addition to the general requirements established in Regulation (EC) No 1935/20042 of the European Parliament and of the Council on materials and articles intended to come into contact with food. Active materials and articles are intended to extend the shelf life or to maintain or improve the condition of packaged food; they are designed to deliberately incorporate components that would release or absorb substances into or from the packaged food or the environment surrounding the food.
The substance(s) responsible for the active and/or intelligent function of the material should be included in a positive list by the Commission following a safety evaluation by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) according to the procedure described in the above‐mentioned regulations.
According to this procedure, the industry submits applications to the Member States competent authorities which transmit the applications to EFSA for their evaluation. The application is supported by a technical dossier submitted by the industry following the EFSA ‘Guidelines on submission of a dossier for safety evaluation by EFSA of active or intelligent substances present in active and intelligent materials and articles intended to come into contact with food’ (EFSA CEF Panel, 2009).
In this case, EFSA received an application from the Bundesamt für Verbraucherschutz und Lebensmittelsicherheit, Germany, submitted by McAirlaid's Vliesstoffe GmbH, Germany, requesting the evaluation of polyacrylic acid, sodium salt, cross‐linked.
According to Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council on materials and articles intended to come into contact with food, EFSA is asked to carry out an assessment of the risks related to the intended use of the substance and to deliver a scientific opinion.
The applicant has submitted a dossier in support of their application for the authorisation of polyacrylic acid, sodium salt, cross‐linked, to be used in active food contact materials (FCM).
Data submitted and used for the evaluation are:

Non‐toxicological data and information
Data on identityData on physical and chemical propertiesData on intended use and authorisationData on migration of the substanceData on residual content of the substance


Toxicological data

No toxicological data were submitted.
In the context of the safety evaluation by EFSA of active or intelligent substances present in active and intelligent materials and articles intended to come into contact with food (EFSA CEF Panel, 2009), the safety evaluation is conducted using the general methodological framework established for monomers and additives used to make plastics and published as the guidelines of the Scientific Committee on Food (SCF) (EC, 2001).
The assessment was conducted in line with the principles laid down in Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 on materials and articles intended to come into contact with food. This Regulation underlines that applicants may consult the guidelines of the SCF for the presentation of an application for safety assessment of a substance to be used in FCM prior to its authorisation (EC, 2001), including the corresponding data requirements. The dossier that the applicant submitted for evaluation was in line with the SCF guidelines (EC, 2001).
The methodology is based on the characterisation of the substance(s) that are the subject of the request for safety assessment prior to authorisation, its impurities and reaction and degradation products, the evaluation of the exposure to those substances through migration, and the definition of minimum sets of toxicity data required for safety assessment.
To establish the safety from ingestion of migrating substances, the toxicological data indicating the potential hazard and the likely human exposure data need to be combined. Exposure is estimated from studies on migration into food or food simulants and considering that a person may consume daily up to 1 kg of food in contact with the relevant FCM.
As a general rule, the greater the exposure through migration, the more toxicological data is required for the safety assessment of a substance. Currently, there are three tiers with different thresholds triggering the need for more toxicological information as follows:
In case of high migration (i.e. 5–60 mg/kg food), an extensive data set is needed.In case of migration between 0.05 and 5 mg/kg food, a reduced data set may suffice.In case of low migration (i.e. < 0.05 mg/kg food), only a limited data set is needed.

More detailed information on the required data is available in the SCF guidelines (EC, 2001).
The assessment was conducted in line with the principles described in the EFSA Guidance on transparency in the scientific aspects of risk assessment (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2009) and considering the relevant guidance from the EFSA Scientific Committee.
According to the applicant, the substance polyacrylic acid, sodium salt, cross‐linked, is intended to be used in absorbent pads in the packaging of meat, fish and fruits, in order to absorb liquids released from the food (Figure 1).
The pads are intended for use at room temperature or lower. The outer layer of the absorbent pads is a perforated plastic material, for example, polyethylene. The absorption core consists of the active substance mixed with virgin fluff pulp (cellulose).
Cellulose is authorised as starting substance and additive for plastic material and articles in contact with food under Regulation (EU) 10/2011 with no specific restriction (cellulose, FCM substance No 553).
The active substance is polyacrylic acid, sodium salt, cross‐linked. Polyacrylic acid, sodium salt is authorised as an additive for plastic materials and articles in contact with food under Regulation (EU) No 10/2011 with a group specific migration limit (SML) of 6 mg/kg, expressed as acrylic acid (polyacrylic acid, salts, FCM Substance No 70).
The substance is a high molecular weight polymer. In an analysis using gel permeation chromatography, no oligomeric species with a molecular weight lower than 1,000 Da were detected. Residual impurities of solvents and polymerisation inhibitor were reported.
The substance is stable under the conditions of processing and use. The absorption capacity of the substance, measured with a saline solution, is ca. 34 g/g.
The substance is not intended to make direct contact with the food and is separated by a perforated plastic layer permeable to liquids.
The cross‐linker ■■■■■ is used at only low levels ■■■■■. It has a rather high molecular weight ■■■■■. If any unreacted residues of the cross‐linker were to remain in the absorber gel, it would not migrate under the time/temperature conditions of use of the absorber pads if direct contact of the active substance with the food is avoided.
Due to the high absorption of liquids, migration of the substance and its residual ingredients and impurities is not to be expected, when the substance is used in the foreseen conditions and the absorption capacity of the pad is not exceeded.
The substance is a cross‐linked polymer manufactured using acrylic acid, which is an authorised monomer, and sodium hydroxide which is an authorised additive/polymer production aid. Acrylic acid was evaluated as not genotoxic based on in vitro and in vivo studies (ECB, 2002; Johannsen et al., 2008) and it is included in the group SML of 6 mg/kg, expressed as acrylic acid, under Regulation (EU) No 10/2011, mentioned in Section 3.1. The non‐cross‐linked polymer is an authorised additive for FCM under Regulation (EU) No 10/2011.
As to the cross‐linker ■■■■■, the Panel noted that it is structurally related to other substances already evaluated as not genotoxic. A multifunctional acrylate, 1,1,1‐trimethylolpropane trimethacrylate, was evaluated as not genotoxic based on two in vivo studies (a bone marrow micronucleus test in mice and an unscheduled DNA synthesis (UDS) test with rat hepatocytes) (SCF, 2001). Similarly, trimethylolpropane triacrylate is negative in vitro in bacterial mutation test and in vivo did not induce significant increase of micronuclei frequency in peripheral blood of mice (NTP, 2005; Surh et al., 2014). In addition, mono‐ and multifunctional acrylates and methacrylates are reported not to induce genotoxic effects when tested in vivo (Johannsen et al., 2008). Taking this information into consideration, the Panel concludes that there is no concern for genotoxicity of the cross‐linker ■■■■■.
As no migration of the active substance or its residual ingredients or impurities is expected under the conditions of use described, it is not considered necessary to ask for toxicological data.
Having considered the above‐mentioned information, the CEF Panel concluded that this polyacrylic acid, sodium salt, cross‐linked, does not raise a safety concern for the consumer when used in liquid absorbent pads, in the packaging of fresh or frozen meat, fish, fruits and vegetables, at room temperature or lower. The absorbent pads must be used only under conditions in which the liquid absorption capacity is not exceeded and direct contact between the substance and the food is excluded.

Dossier sodium polyacrylate, cross linked. June 2014. Submitted by McAirlaid's Vliesstoffe GmbH.Missing information for the dossier. April 2015. Submitted by McAirlaid's Vliesstoffe GmbH.Additional information for the dossier. December 2015. Submitted by McAirlaid's Vliesstoffe GmbH.


CEF PanelEFSA Panel on Food Contact Materials, Enzymes, Flavourings and Processing AidsECEuropean CommissionFCMfood contact materialsSCFScientific Committee on FoodSMLspecific migration limitUDSunscheduled DNA synthesis
