Background:The aim of this study was to assess the effect of volume guarantee (VG) on high-frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) compared with HFOV alone in preterm infants with hypoxic respiratory failure (HRF).Methods:Fifty-two preterm infants with HRF refractory to conventional mechanical ventilation (CMV) were enrolled in this study. Between June 2012 and February 2016, HFOV alone was used as rescue therapy when CMV failed for 34 infants, whereas HFOV combined with VG was used as rescue therapy for the other 18 infants between March 2016 and December 2017.Results:HFOV combined with VG resulted in a reduction in the combined outcome of death or bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) (p = 0.017) and also a reduction in episodes of hypercarbia (p = 0.010) compared with HFOV alone.Conclusion:In this study, the preterm infants with HRF ventilated using HFOV combined with VG had a reduced combined outcome of death or BPD and hypercarbia compared with those who received HFOV alone.

Tidal volume (VT) has been reported to be the main determinant of ventilator-induced lung injury rather than inflation pressure.1 Many previous studies have shown that the use of volume-target ventilation (VTV) modes can reduce the combined outcome of death or bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), pneumothorax, hypocarbia, and duration of mechanical ventilation compared with pressure-limited ventilation in preterm infants.2–4
Volume guarantee (VG) is a form of VTV, in which a microprocessor compares the exhaled VT of the previous inflation and adjusts the working pressure up or down to deliver a target VT. The advantages of VG ventilation have been reported.5–8 High-frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) has been used for preterm infants with respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) and acute pulmonary dysfunction. Cools et al reported that the use of HFOV resulted in a small reduction in the risk of BPD compared with conventional mechanical ventilation (CMV).9 Recently, the effect of VG combined with HFOV in preterm infants and animal model has been reported.10–13 The purpose of this study was to assess the effect of VG on HFOV compared with HFOV alone in preterm infants with hypoxic respiratory failure (HRF).
We conducted a retrospective analysis of data from intubated preterm infants requiring mechanical ventilation therapy at our neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) from June 2012 to December 2017. Our NICU is a level III NICU.
A total of 52 preterm infants with HRF defined as an oxygenation index (OI) > 15 refractory to CMV were enrolled in this study. Term infants or infants with congenital malformations were excluded. OI was calculated as follows: mean airway pressure × FiO2 × 100/PaO2. HFOV was used as rescue therapy for all 52 preterm infants after CMV had failed. Between June 2012 and February 2016, HFOV (SLE 5000, SLE UK, Croyden, United Kingdom) alone was used in 34 of the 52 infants, whereas HFOV combined with VG (Babylog VN 500, Dräger, Lübeck, Germany) was used between March 2016 and December 2017 in the other 18 infants.
The characteristics of the patients in both groups are summarized in Table 1. The mean birth weights in the HFOV alone and HFOV with VG groups were 1113.1 ± 639.6 g (range: 512-2485 g) and 1319.5 ± 776.5 g (range: 450-2460 g), respectively, and the mean gestational ages were 27.7 ± 4.1 weeks (range: from 23 weeks 1 day to 36 weeks 2 days) and 29.7 ± 4.6 weeks (range: from 23 weeks 2 days to 36 weeks 4 days), respectively. The ages at initial HFOV therapy in the HFOV alone and HFOV with VG groups were 7.15 ± 7.83 days (range: 1-29 days) and 6.17 ± 6.21 days (range: 1-22 days), respectively. The underlying diseases in the HFOV alone group were RDS (29 patients), neonatal pneumonia (three patients), and idiopathic persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN) (two patients), compared to RDS (13 patients), neonatal pneumonia (four patients), and idiopathic PPHN (one patient) in the HFOV with VG group. None of the three patients (two in the HFOV alone group and one in the HFOV with VG group) with idiopathic PPHN in this study had RDS, neonatal pneumonia, or other underlying diseases. Fourteen patients in the HFOV alone group and eight patients in the HFOV with VG group had RDS or neonatal pneumonia combined with pulmonary hypertension, which was confirmed by echocardiographic examinations. Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) therapy was used in16 patients in the HFOV alone group and nine patients in the HFOV with VG group with evidence of pulmonary hypertension. All of the patients who received iNO therapy received echocardiographic examinations and Doppler (Siemens Medical Solutions USA, Inc. Mountain View, CA, USA) measurements of tricuspid regurgitation jet, direction of patent ductus arteriosus shunt, and direction of atrial shunt. Echocardiographic findings of pulmonary hypertension including elevated pulmonary artery pressure, right-to-left or bidirectional patent ductus arteriosus, or patent foramen ovale shunting were found in all of the patients using iNO therapy ventilation strategy.
All infants included in this study received CMV therapy initially. In the infants who subsequently had hypoxemia (PaO2 < 50 mmHg or SpO2 < 80%) or hypercarbia (PaCO2 > 60 mmHg) with OI > 15, HFOV was used as rescue therapy. During the initial phase of HFOV, a lung volume recruitment maneuver was carried out in all patients according to usual clinical practice, beginning with a mean airway pressure 1 to 2 cmH2O higher than that when receiving CMV. Subsequently, slight increases in mean airway pressure of 1 to 2 cmH2O were introduced until the critical lung opening pressure was reached. Opening pressure and optimal pressure were determined using the lung recruitment maneuver as previously described.14 Ideal lung inflation was controlled by chest radiography, and the right diaphragm was kept at the level of the 9th rib. Pressure amplitude was set to achieve perceptible chest wall motion and changed to optimize ventilation. Respiratory frequency was set 13 to 15 Hz for infants with a birth weight < 1000 g, 12 to 13 Hz for infants with a birth weight between 1000 g and 1500 g, and 10 to 12 Hz for infants with a birth weight > 1500 g. An oscillatory inspiratory/expiratory (I:E) ratio of 1:1 was used with the SLE 5000 ventilator and 1:2 in the Dräger VN 500 ventilator. The high-frequency tidal volume (VThf) was set between 1.5 and 2.5 mL/kg, with an initial setting of 2 mL/kg. Measurements of arterial blood gas were obtained every 12 hours within 72 hours after HFOV therapy, and then every 24 hours throughout the study period. The arterial blood gas targets were to keep the pH from 7.25 to 7.45, PaO2 from 50 to 70 mmHg, PaCO2 from 35 to 55 mmHg, and arterial oxygen saturation (SpO2) from 90% to 95%.
Hypocarbia was defined as PaCO2 < 35 mmHg, and hypercarbia was defined as PaCO2 > 60 mmHg. Hypoxemia was defined as PaO2 < 50 mmHg or SpO2 < 80%. BPD was defined as oxygen treatment or respiratory support at 36 weeks corrected gestational age. Sepsis was defined as a positive blood culture treated for at least 7 days with antibiotics. Intraventricular hemorrhage was defined as either intraventricular hemorrhage with or without ventricular dilatation or intracerebral (parenchymal) hemorrhage on cranial ultrasound.15 The study was approved by the Ethical Committee at Chung Shan Medical University Hospital.
Data were analyzed using IBM SPSS version 22 for Windows (IBM SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Means were compared using the Student’s t test, and Fisher’s exact test was used for categorical data. A two side p-value of <0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
There were no significant differences in birth body weight, gestational age, sex, age at initial HFOV therapy, number of patients receiving iNO therapy, maximal iNO concentration, and duration of iNO therapy between the HFOV alone and HFOV with VG groups (all p > 0.05). Table 2 summarizes the outcomes of the study infants. There were no significant differences in the duration of ventilation, number of patients with hypoxemia, death, BPD, intraventricular hemorrhage, sepsis and air leak between the two groups (all p > 0.05). There were 61 episodes of hypocarbia in the HFOV alone group and 16 episodes in the HFOV with VG group. Although the difference was not significantly different (p = 0.075), there was a trend of a reduction in the number of episodes of hypocarbia in the HFOV with VG group compared to the HFOV alone group. The incidence of episodes of hypercarbia was significantly lower (p = 0.01) in the HFOV with VG group than in HFOV alone group. The combined outcome of death or BPD was also significantly lower (p = 0.017) in the HFOV with VG group than in the HFOV alone group.
In animal models, the use of HFOV has been shown to result in more uniform lung inflation, improved oxygenation, and reduced severity of lung injury produced by intermittent positive pressure ventilation.16,17 Cools et al reported that the use of elective HFOV resulted in a small reduction in the risk of chronic lung disease compared with CMV.9 In this study, we used HFOV as rescue therapy for all infants when CMV failed.
In this study, 16 infants in the HFOV alone group and nine in the HFOV with VG group who had positive echocardiographic findings of pulmonary hypertension received iNO therapy. Dobyns et al reported that the combination of HFOV with iNO resulted in a greater improvement in oxygenation than either treatment strategy alone in children with acute HRF.18 In addition, Golfar et al reported that many very low birth weight infants with severe HRF treated with HFOV and iNO survived without neurodevelopmental disabilities.19 Although the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) does not support the use of iNO in early routine, early rescue, or later rescue regimens in infants born at <34 weeks of gestation,20 many studies have shown that iNO therapy can improve oxygenation in preterm infants with HRF and pulmonary hypertension.21,22 In this study, iNO was only used in the infants with HRF who had positive echocardiographic findings of pulmonary hypertension.
In VTV, automatic adjustments to the peak positive pressure or the duration of the ventilator cycle are made to maintain a target VT. VTV modes have been proposed as a means to reduce ventilator-induced lung injury caused by ventilation with excessive or insufficient VT during conventional pressure-controlled ventilation.2–4 Pen et al reported that preterm infants ventilated using VTV modes had a reduced duration of mechanical ventilation, incidence of BPD, failure of primary mode of ventilation, hypocarbia, grade 3/4 intraventricular hemorrhage, pneumothorax, and periventricular leukomalacia.3 VG ventilation is one of the more commonly used VTV modes in neonates. In VG ventilation, the peak pressure of each ventilator cycle is adjusted to maintain a target VT based on exhaled VT measured in previous cycles. VG ventilation has been reported to avoid both extremes of VT and achieve a constant reduction in peak pressure. Keszler et al reported that VG significantly reduced hypocarbia and excessively large VT.6 In addition, Jain et al reported that although the use of VG during routine clinical conditions resulted in a modest reduction in the duration of hypoxemia episodes (SpO2 < 85%) compared with pressure control ventilation, the use of VG did not reduce the incidence of more severe hypoxemia episodes.7 Several studies have investigated the effect of VG on HFOV in preterm infants.10,12 Iscan et al found that HFOV with VG could lower VThf fluctuations and reduce the incidence of out-of-target CO2 levels compared with HFOV alone, and Enomoto et al found that VG combined with HFOV attenuated fluctuations of SpO2 and CO2 clearance, thereby preventing hypoxemia and hypocarbia.12
Our data showed that HFOV combined with VG reduced the incidence (p < 0.05) of hypercarbia and combined outcome of death or BPD compared to HFOV alone. Although the difference was not significant (p = 0.075), there was a trend toward a lower rate of hypocarbia in the HFOV with VG group than in the HFOV alone group. Hypocarbia and hypercarbia have been associated with brain damage in preterm infants.23–25 Our data showed that HFOV with VG resulted in a reduction in the combined outcome of death or BPD, which is consistent with previous studies by Wheeler et al, who reported that compared with pressure-limited ventilation, infants ventilated using VTV had a reduced combined outcome of death or BPD.2,4
There are several limitations to this study. First, this was a retrospective study. Second, it was conducted at a single center. Third, we used a SLE 5000 ventilator in the HFOV alone group between June 2012 and February 2016, and a Dräger VN 500 ventilator combined with VG in the HFOV with VG group between March 2016 and December 2017.
In conclusion, HFOV with VG reduced rates of hypercarbia and combined outcome of death or BPD compared with HFOV alone. There was a trend toward a reduced rate of hypocarbia in the HFOV with VG group. Thus, we suggest that using this new lung protection strategy can reduce ventilator-induced lung injury in preterm infants.
The authors thank Dr. Xing-An Wang for caring for the preterm infants at our NICU, and Dr. Shan-Ming Chen for statistical assistance.