Clinical trials testing the use of either autologous or allogeneic human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) as a cell-based pharmaceutical for suppression of autoimmune and alloimmune ailments are underway. Reported results from completed trials vary in effectiveness within and between studies without any clear mechanistic explanation. We propose that these discrepancies may arise from intrinsic variability in the immunosuppressive potential of each MSC donor source. Here, we demonstrate that tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ)-activated MSC derived from normal adult volunteers suppress T cell proliferation in vitro in a variegated manner, an observation linked to IFN-mediated indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) upregulation. We also demonstrate that MSC IDO activity is implicated in the differentiation of monocytes into interleukin (IL)-10-secreting M2 immunosuppressive macrophages (CD14+/CD206+). Those monocyte-derived M2 are in turn implicated in the suppression of T cell proliferation in an IL-10-independent manner, thus amplifying the immunosuppressive effect generated by MSC. In summary, the immune plasticity of IFN-γ and TNF-α licensed veto function of MSC vary among donors and defines a central role to inducible IDO activity and its bystander effect on lymphomyeloid immune effectors.

Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), an interferon-γ (IFN-γ)-inducible intracellular enzyme, catalyzes the first step in tryptophan degradation along the kynurenine pathway. The product of IDO enzymatic activity, kynurenine can be further catabolized into kynurenic acid, anthranilic acid, or 3-hydroxykynurenine which produces quinolinic acid and picolinic acid. IDO activity was first identified as a defense mechanism against microbial invasions because it induces the depletion of tryptophan, an essential amino acid for the proliferation of bacteria, parasites, and viruses.1 The expression of IDO in dendritic cells and macrophages has now been involved in tolerance induction, mainly by inducing T cell apoptosis/anergy and the generation of regulatory T cells (Treg).2,3 Tryptophan depletion and several metabolites of the kynurenine pathway were shown to activate the stress response kinase CGN2 which lead to T cell arrest and apoptosis.4,5 In addition, several studies observed a disparity between the outcome of GCN2 activation in activated and resting T cells. Stimulation of GCN2 kinase pathway in activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells induces cell arrest/apoptosis,6 while resting CD4+ T cells differentiate into CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ Treg.7,8
In mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) of mouse and human origin, the expression of IDO was shown to be induced following exposure to IFN-γ.9, 10, 11 In addition, a careful investigation into the immunosuppressive mechanisms of MSC identified IDO as the main mechanism of T cell suppression by human and simian MSC, whereas murine MSC predominantly rely on the production of nitric oxide.10 In the present report, using an in vitro model of T cell proliferation, we demonstrated that human MSC derived from normal adult donors possess variable degrees of immunosuppressive potential. Using MSC from seven different donors, we showed variability between donors in their ability to suppress T proliferation. Furthermore, we confirmed that IDO enzymatic activity of MSC is the main mechanism of T cell suppression and that the level of expression of IDO correlated with the suppressive potential of a given MSC donor. We also observed that the enzymatic activity of IDO was partially implicated in the differentiation of the monocyte fraction of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) into interleukin (IL)-10-secreting M2 immunosuppressive macrophages. Depletion of the monocyte fraction from PBMC and addition of supplemental monocytes confirm their bystander contribution to T cell suppression by MSC.
The MSC used in this study were isolated from bone marrow aspirates collected in consenting patients undergoing elective hip replacement surgery. Therefore, donors were mostly females over the age of 60 year old (Table 1). MSC isolation was performed based on plastic adherence and the cell culture homogeneity was confirmed by flow cytometry phenotype analysis. Despite small differences in the level of expression, all MSC used in this study expressed the standard cell surface markers for MSC; CD44, CD73, CD90, and CD105 (Supplementary Figure S1a). The absence of endothelial and hematopoietic cells was confirmed by the lack of CD31+ and CD45+ cells, respectively (data not shown). All MSC tested were able to differentiate into adipocytes and osteocytes with the proper differentiation media, although at a qualitatively variable extent (Supplementary Figure S1b).Table 1Human MSC donor descriptionsDonors #GenderAge (years)303Female72304Female68305Female62306Female62307Female78308Male50311Female70Abbreviation: MSC, mesenchymal stromal cell.
The immunosuppressive properties of human MSC toward T cells have been studied in vitro using several methods of T cell activation. Here, we chose to use antihuman CD3 and CD28 antibodies to induce T cell proliferation as it represented a physiological mechanism of T cell stimulation (in contrast to the use of phytohaemagglutinin or ionomycin) and it allowed a consistent level of T cell proliferation between experiments when compared to the use of mixed lymphocyte reactions using T-cells from unrelated donors (data not shown). Allogeneic carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE)-labeled and CD3/CD28-activated PBMC were cultured with MSC for 4 days at MSC:PBMC ratio of 1:3, 1:9, and 1:27, as indicated, and T cell proliferation was determined by measuring the amount of CFSElow T cells gated in the leukocyte population on the forward and side scatter plot. We first tested the effect of prestimulation of the MSC with proinflammatory cytokines. MSC were either unstimulated or pretreated with IFN-γ, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), or the combination of both overnight before their addition to the PBMC proliferation assay at a ratio of 1:3, 1:9, and 1:27 MSC: PBMC. Fold decrease in T cell proliferation obtained for TNF-α- and IFN-γ-stimulated MSC was of 5.3-fold and 22.7-fold for donor 304 and 316, respectively as compared to 3.9-fold and 7.6-fold for IFN-γ-stimulated MSC and 2.3-fold and 4-fold for TNF-α-stimulated MSC (data not shown). Because the combination of IFN-γ and TNF-α lead to a more potent inhibitory effect then single cytokine activation, combined cytokine stimulation was therefore used for the all following experiments. In addition, real-time quantitative PCR analyses performed on single or double cytokine activation demonstrated that the expression of several immune factors in MSC is strongly upregulated by TNF-α and IFN-γ activation (Supplementary Figure S2). Subsequently, we tested the activation and proliferation of T cells in coculture with (i) naive unstimulated MSC and (ii) IFN-γ and TNF-α pretreated MSC at ratio 1:3, 1:9, and 1:27 (MSC:PBMC) on three separate experiments performed with allogeneic PBMC from different donors (Figure 1a,b). As demonstrated by others,10, 11, 12 we observed that prestimulation of MSC with TNF-α and IFN-γ significantly enhanced their in vitro immunosuppressive potential, which was reflected by the reduction in T cell proliferation [Figure 1b (i, ii)] and production of IFN-γ [Figure 1c (i, ii)] independently of the MSC: PBMC ratio used. T cell proliferation means for all donors at ratio 1:3, 1:9, and 1:27 underwent a fold decrease of 1.9 (P > 0.05), 1.7 (P < 0.001), and 1.2 (P < 0.01), respectively following cytokine prestimulation of the MSC. In addition, we observed that MSC isolated from different individuals possessed variable immunosuppressive potential. At ratio 1:3, all donors nontreated or cytokine-stimulated showed statistically different levels of T cell proliferation compared to the PBMC only control (P < 0.01). At ratio 1:9 however, only donors 308 and 303, cytokine-activated and donor 308 nontreated were statistically different (P < 0.05) from the control in all three separated experiments. Thus these results demonstrate the existence of differential immunosuppressive potential between MSC donors independently of the PBMC source used.Figure 1The immunosuppressive potential of human mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) varies between donors. (a) T cell proliferation assays were performed using carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE)-labeled human peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) activated with 0.2 µg/ml anti-CD3 and CD28 antibodies and cocultured with or without MSC for 4 days at MSC:PBMC ratios of 1:3, 1:9, and 1:27. T cell proliferation was performed on seven MSC donors (donor 303. 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, and 311) and MSC were preactivated for 18 hours with 10 ng/ml of interferon (IFN)-γ and 3 ng/ml of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) before their addition to the coculture. Cell proliferation was determined by flow cytometry after gating the leukocyte population on the forward and side scatter plot and measuring the percentage of CFSElow T cells (figure show representative results). (b) T cell proliferation was measured as in a using MSC:PBMC ratios of 1:3, 1:9, and 1:27. MSC were either left (i) untreated or (ii) preactivated with IFN-γ and TNF-α before their addition to the coculture. Results show means ± s.d. of three independent experiments using different allogeneic PBMC donors. (c) Levels of IFN-γ were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in the supernatant of a T cell proliferation assay performed as in a with (i) untreated or (ii) cytokine preactivated MSC. Results show duplicates ± SD.
We sought to identify the main mechanism by which human MSC inhibits T cell proliferation in vitro. We focused on four potential immune factors involved in human MSC-mediated T cell suppression: IL-10, transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), PGE2 derived from Cox2 activity and IDO.13,14 We examined the gene expression of these molecules at steady state and following exposure to the combination of IFN-γ and TNF-α for 24 hours using real-time quantitative PCR in MSC donors and, for comparison, in adherent fraction of PBMC (mostly monocytes) activated with TNF-α and IFN-γ. Comparative analysis was performed in order to exclude genes that are expressed in MSC in very small amount compared to immune cells, for instance IL-12.15 Here, IL-10 mRNA mentioned in other papers11 as being expressed in MSC was barely detectable in naive or cytokine-stimulated MSC when compared to cytokine-activated monocytes [Figure 2a (i)]. TGF-β mRNA expression was detected in all MSC donors, but at levels below the one of activated monocytes. In addition, cytokine stimulation of the MSC did not have any effect on the expression level of TGF-β mRNA [Figure 2a (ii)]. Cox2 and IDO mRNA were constitutively expressed or absent in naive MSC, respectively. Both were strongly induced following TNF-α and IFN-γ exposure when compared to monocytes. Differences in levels of induction of IDO (P < 0.05 to P < 0.01) but not Cox2 (P > 0.05) mRNA levels between individuals could be observed [Figure 2a (iii, iv)]. Donors 303 and 308, who were the most efficient inhibitors of T cell proliferation, expressed higher levels of IDO mRNA compared to the other donors [Figure 2a (iv)]. Next, the role played by each of these molecules in the suppressive effect of MSC was tested in a proliferation assay using specific inhibitors against Cox2, IDO, and TGF-β. We observed that 1-methyl-DL-tryptophan (1-MT), a specific inhibitor of IDO, not only abolished the ability of MSC to suppress T cell proliferation, but further stimulated T cell proliferation (Figure 2b). Within contrast, indomethacin and anti-TGF-β neutralizing antibodies did not affect the immunosuppressive activity of MSC. This was also observed with nontreated MSC (data not shown). We hypothesized that MSC secrete both factors that stimulate and inhibit T cell proliferation in different proportions and that in the absence of inhibitory factors, in this case IDO, MSC-derived factors that stimulate T cell proliferation dominate. Of note, activation of the MSC with IFN-γ and TNF-α upregulated the mRNA expression of genes encoding IL-6 and IL-7 (Supplementary Figure S2b) which are known to stimulate T cell proliferation.16,17 We therefore tested the involvement of IL-6 in the regulation of T cell proliferation observed, by adding anti-IL-6 neutralizing antibodies to activated PBMC cultured with supernatant preactivated MSC. As expected, this had for effect to further inhibit T cell proliferation (P < 0.01) (Figure 2c). With this result, we confirmed that IDO is the main mechanism of human MSC-mediated T cell immunosuppression in vitro.Figure 2Inhibition of indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) activity of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) suppresses their immunosuppressive action on T cells. (a) mRNA expression level of (i) interleukin (IL)-10, (ii) transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), (iii) Cox2, and (iv)indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) encoding genes were measured by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) in nontreated MSC or MSC stimulated for 24 hours with 10 ng/ml interferon (IFN)-γ and 3 ng/ml tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). Total RNA extracts from the adherent cell population of human peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC), constituted mostly of monocytes (Mo), stimulated for 24 hours with IFN-γ and TNF-α was used for comparison and attributed a value of 1. Relative quantification (RQ) was calculated by normalizing to 18S mRNA levels. Results shows mean of duplicates ± SD. (b) T cell proliferation was measured as in (a) in cocultures with TNF-α and IFN-γ preactivated MSC at ratio MSC: PBMC of 1:3 in the presence of 10 µmol/l indomethacin, 1 mmol/l 1-methyl-DL-tryptophan (1-MT), or 20 µg/ml anti-TGF-β neutralizing antibodies. Figure shows representative results of 1 experiment out of 2. (c) T cell proliferation was measured in a proliferation assay performed with carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE)-labeled PBMC activated with anti-CD3/CD28 antibodies in the presence of conditioned media from preactivated MSC with or without 20 µg/ml of anti-IL-6 neutralizing antibody. Conditioned media was obtained by stimulating MSC with the TNF-α and IFN-γ for 4 hours; washing and culturing in fresh medium for 24 hours. Figure shows means ± SD from representative results of 1 experiment out of 2.
Since we confirmed IDO as the main mechanism of T cell inhibition by activated MSC in vitro, we examined protein levels of IDO in MSC donors by immunoblotting. We confirmed that the protein expression of IDO was inducible by stimulating the MSC with the combination of TNF-α and IFN-γ for 24 hours [Figure 3a (i, ii)] and estimated the relative intensity of each band by performing densitometry analysis (data not shown). We then determined the correlation coefficient between the amount of IDO produced (relative intensity of the protein band) and the percentage of T cell proliferation obtained with each donor by performing a one-tailed Pearson's test. Our result demonstrated a significant correlation between the amount of IDO and level of T cell proliferation (P < 0.05) [Figure 3a (iii)]. Because the transcription of IDO is tightly regulated by IFN sensitive response element in the promoter region of the IDO-encoding gene,18 we sought to determine the level of sensitivity to IFN-γ signaling in each MSC donor by examining STAT-1 phosphorylation. After 20 minutes exposure to 10 ng/ml of IFN-γ, variable levels of STAT-1 phosphorylation was observed in the donors (Figure 3b), however, no significant correlation between the level of STAT-1 phosphorylation and the amount of IDO or the suppressive potential of MSC could be made. Therefore, although the amount of IDO produced by a donor is associated to its ability to suppress T cell proliferation, the variable amount of IDO produced by each donor is not due to altered responsiveness to IFN-γ.Figure 3Correlation between the amount of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) produced and the T cell inhibitory potential of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) donor. (a) (i) IDO protein expression was analyzed by immunoblot in nontreated MSC and MSC pretreated for 24 hours with 10 ng/ml interferon (IFN)-γ and 3 ng/ml tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). (ii) IDO protein expression after IFN-γ and TNF-α stimulation by each MSC donor was analyzed by western blot. Relative intensity of each IDO band was estimated by densitometry analysis and normalized to its GAPDH loading control band. (iii) The correlation between the amount of IDO produced by a given MSC donor and its percentage of proliferation inhibition was determined by one-tailed Pearson's test. Figure shows results from three different assays performed with all seven MSC donors and therefore figure shows 21 points in total and the fit by linear regression. (b) (i) Level of STAT-1 phosphorylation was analyzed by immunoblot and (ii) quantified by densitometry using total STAT-1 for normalization in human MSC stimulated for 20 minutes with 10 ng/ml of IFN-γ.
In MSC/PBMC cocultures, we noted the de novo production of IL-10, up to 300 pg/ml, depending on the cytokine preactivation of the MSC and MSC donor (data not shown). Since MSC, naive or cytokine stimulated, do not meaningfully express IL-10 mRNA transcripts (Figure 2a), we investigated the origin of the IL-10 detected. Other studies have demonstrated that MSC can influence other cell types to produce IL-10. It was reported that human MSC can stimulate naive CD4+ T cells to differentiate into IL-10-producing Treg in vitro,19 and that lipopolysaccharide-activated mouse MSC could recruit and stimulate macrophages to produce IL-10 in vivo.20 PBMC responder cells represent a heterogenous mixture of lymphomyeloid cells including lymphocytes and monocytes (typically in a 4:1 ratio). In order to determine the source of IL-10, we performed coculture of MSC with purified CD14+ monocytes, anti-CD3, and CD28 activated purified CD3+ T cells, or the combination of both. All cell types alone produced low levels of IL-10, <20 pg/ml. The combination of monocytes and T cells did not increase IL-10 level above base line and neither did the combination of MSC and T cells (Figure 4a), although we confirmed that MSC induce the generation of Tregs (Supplementary Figure S3). In contrast, combination of naive and cytokine pre-treated MSC to monocytes induced a 4-fold and 7.3-fold increase in IL-10 levels detected, respectively (Figure 4a). Adding activated T cells to the cocultures of MSC and monocytes diminished the amount of IL-10 produced, which still remained significantly higher than the basal level (Figure 4a). We also tested whether the enzymatic activity of IDO produced by MSC had any role in the IL-10 production by monocytes. Adding 1-MT to the MSC/monocytes cocultures significantly reduced the production of IL-10. The IL-10 level of the cocultures with naive MSC decreased from 76 to 62 pg/ml (1.2-fold reduction P < 0.01), whereas the coculture with prestimulated MSC decreased from 138 to 89 pg/ml (1.5-fold decrease; P < 0.001) (Figure 4a). The same observation was done with the combination of naive MSC with monocytes, and T cells in the presence of 1-MT. Because CD14+ monocytes cultured with MSC secreted high amount of IL-10, a feature of alternatively activated immunosuppressive macrophages (M2),21 we tested by flow cytometry analysis for the expression of CD206 in the CD14+ population. We demonstrated that the CD14+ population of activated PBMC cultured with cytokine preactivated MSC significantly upregulated the expression of CD206 [Figure 4b (i)], which corresponded to the detection of IL-10 in the supernatant by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [Figure 4b (ii)]. Thus, the enzymatic activity of IDO in MSC leads to the differentiation of monocytes into IL-10-secreting CD206+ M2 macrophages.Figure 4Upregulation of CD206 and interleukin (IL)-10 expression in monocytes following coculture with mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC). (a) Nontreated MSC or TNF-α and interferon (IFN)-γ preactivated MSC from donor 304 were cultured in combination with peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC)-purified CD14+ monocytes, PBMC-purified CD3+ T cells or both with or without 1 mmol/l 1-methyl-DL-tryptophan (1-MT). All cultures were activated with anti-CD3/CD28 antibodies. Levels of IL-10 in the supernatant of MSC/monocytes/T cells cocultures were measured by enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA). Results show means of duplicates ± SD and 1 representative experiment out of 2. (b) (i) Expression of CD206 in the CD14+ monocyte population was measured by flow cytometry in coculture with TNF-α and IFN-γ preactivated MSC from donor 304, 306, 307, 308, and 311 in combination with CD3/CD28-activated PBMC and (ii) level of IL-10 in supernatants measured by ELISA.
To confirm the role of M2-differentiated monocytes in MSC-mediated T cell suppression, we performed proliferation assays using either total PBMC or PBMC depleted of CD14+ cells with preactivated MSC at ratio 1:3 and 1:9 (MSC:PBMC) (Figure 5a). At a ratio of 1:3, the depletion of CD14+ cells had a minor effect on the immunosuppressive potential of MSC, however, when MSC:PBMC ratio was reduced to 1:9, depletion of the CD14+ fraction partially or completely reversed the immunosuppressive effect of MSC depending on the donor [Figure 5a (i)]. Adding 1-MT to the prestimulated MSC cocultured with CD14-depleted PBMC completely abrogated the immunosuppressive effect of MSC independently of cell ratio [Figure 5a (ii)]. Moreover, when additional monocytes were added to the PBMC proliferation assay, we observed a dose-dependent and statistically significant reduction in the percentage of T cell proliferation [Figure 5b (ii)]. With the addition of monocytes to donor 303, we detected a fold reduction in T cell proliferation of 1.7-fold (P < 0.0001) and 1.8-fold (P < 0.0001) for dose 1 and 2, respectively, whereas donor 305 obtained a reduction of 1.7-fold (P < 0.0001) and 2.3-fold (P < 0.0001) for dose 1 and 2, respectively. A reduction in the level of IL-2 [Figure 5b (iii)] and IFN-γ [Figure 5b (iv)] detected in the supernatant was also noted following the addition of monocyte to the PBMC proliferation assay. Interestingly, before normalization of the T cell proliferation [Figure 5b (i)], we noticed that the addition of monocytes to the PBMC only control groups, strongly increases T cell proliferation. However, after normalization, we observed that the addition of purified monocytes decreases T cell proliferation, therefore suggesting that MSC both directly inhibit T cell proliferation and indirectly via the differentiation of monocytes into M2-like macrophages.Figure 5Involvement of the monocyte population in the mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC)-mediated T cell inhibition. (a) T cell proliferation was measured in proliferation assays as detailed in Figure 1a and using tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interferon (IFN)-γ-preactivated MSC at MSC:PBMC ratios of 1:3 and 1:9 with (i) whole or CD14-depleted peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) or (ii) CD14-depleted PBMC with or without 1 mmol/l 1-methyl-DL-tryptophan (1-MT). Figure show 1 representative experiment out of 2. (b) T cell proliferation assay using TNF-α and IFN-γ-preactivated MSC at MSC: PBMC ratios of 1:9 and measured as in Figure 1a. Assays were performed with total PBMC to which PBMC donor-derived purified monocytes were added. Dose 1 and dose 2 represent 0.5× and 1.5× the total amount of CD14+ monocyte/PBMC added, respectively. Panels show (i) total and (ii) normalize percentage of T cell proliferation as well as the level of (iii) interleukin (IL)-2 and (iv) IFN-γ detected in the supernatant after 4 days. Figure shows means ± SD from representative results of 1 experiment out of 2.
With this study, we identified IDO as the sole direct mechanism of MSC-mediated T cell suppression in vitro and thus confirming previous findings9, 10, 11 performed with human and nonhuman primate MSC. Similarly to these results, we observed that human MSC upon the action of IFN-γ upregulate the intracellular enzyme IDO, and that blocking the enzymatic activity of IDO resulted in a complete abrogation of the immunosuppressive effect of MSC on T cells. IFN-γ alone is sufficient to upregulate IDO, but we choose here to combine IFN-γ and TNF-α stimulation of the MSC as the combination further increases T cell suppression. In addition, we reported two other insights of significance. First, MSC derived from normal donors apparently display a range of immunosuppressive potential. The upregulation of IDO following exposure to TNF-α and IFN-γ varied between donors and stronger producers of IDO were more potent inhibitors of T cell proliferation in vitro, establishing a correlation between amount of IDO produced and level of T cell inhibition. A broad examination of the transcriptional expression of several chemokines, cytokines, and other immune-modulatory factors, revealed that each donor expressed and upregulated these molecules at various levels (Supplementary Figure S2). Our results on IFN-γ-mediated STAT-1 phosphorylation indicated that the variability in sensitivity to IFN-γ stimulation of MSC donors did not correlate with either the expression of IDO nor the immunosuppressive potential of each individual. These results rather suggested that intrinsic variegation in the immune plasticity of MSC in response to inflammatory cytokines likely exists within the human population.
Second, we discovered that the immunosuppressive activity of IDO expressed by human MSC was not limited to T cells, but also influenced monocytes. From the study of the involvement of IDO in dendritic cell-mediated tolerance2,3 it is known that the enzymatic activity of IDO catalyzes the cleavage of tryptophan into kynurenine which can be subsequently catabolized into kynurenine metabolites, all shown to possess immunoregulatory properties toward T cells (reviewed in ref. 2). Here, we demonstrated that the enzymatic activity of IDO can mediate a direct and indirect inhibition of T cell proliferation. Summarized in Figure 6, IFN-γ produced by T cells in an inflammatory milieu induces the expression of IDO in MSC and thus the conversion of tryptophan into kynurenine which leads to a direct inhibition of T cell proliferation. Indirectly, we demonstrated that the enzymatic activity of IDO and possibly other factors secreted by MSC induces the conversion of monocytes into IL-10-secreting CD206+ M2-like macrophages, which possess T-cell immunosuppressive properties on their own. Both depletion of monocyte or additional of supplementary monocytes to the PBMC proliferation assay confirmed this observation (Figure 5).Figure 6Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC)-mediated T cell immunosuppression mechanisms. Our proposed mechanism of MSC-meditated T cell immunosuppression involves both a direct and indirect pathway. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) protein expression and enzymatic activity induced in MSC following exposure to interferon (IFN)-γ from the inflammatory milieu catalyze the degradation of tryptophan (TRP) present in the surrounding environment into kynurenine (KYN). The catabolic activity of IDO can directly suppress T cell proliferation or act indirectly through the surrounding monocytes. Tryptophan depletion or metabolites of the kynurenine pathway and possibly other unknown factors secreted by MSC mediate the differentiation of monocytes into interleukin (IL)-10 secreting, CD206+ immunosuppressive M2 macrophages which in turn contribute to T cell suppression in IL-10-independent mechanism in vitro.
Surprisingly, adding anti-IL-10 neutralizing antibodies to our in vitro system had no meaningful effect on T cell proliferation when cocultured with activated monocytes (Supplementary Figure S4). This does not discredit the involvement of monocyte-derived IL-10 in the immunosuppressive mechanism of MSC in vivo, but rather suggests that in addition to IL-10, MSC-licensed monocytes generate supplementary immunosuppressive effectors in vitro. For instance, although we excluded Treg as the main source of IL-10 production, we examined the generation of Treg in our model (Supplementary Figure S3). Our results recapitulated previous finding19 and showed that MSC induce the differentiation of CD4+ T cells into regulatory CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ T cells. In addition, we demonstrated that the percentage of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ T cells generated was reduced following the depletion of the monocyte fraction (Supplementary Figure S3). The enzymatic activity of IDO in combination with other factors secreted by MSC, such as TGF-β could induce the production of Treg7,8,22, 23 which although may not have a clear effect on T cell proliferation in vitro could have a significant impact in vivo.
In our study, we demonstrated that the coculture of MSC with CD14+ monocytes induces upregulation of CD206 and the secretion of IL-10 by monocytes, two features characteristic on M2-like macrophage phenotype. Two other studies performed with human MSC also observed the induction of IL-10 in monocyte/macrophage following exposure to undefined effecter molecules derived from MSC or MSC condition media.24,25 We demonstrated that 1-MT partially inhibited IL-10 production by monocytes induced under the influence of MSC, suggesting a possible involvement of tryptophan depletion or/and kynurenine metabolites in the differentiation of monocytes into M2 immunosuppressive macrophages. The study by Wang et al. corroborate our hypothesis by demonstrating that adding kynurenic acid to lipopolysaccharide-activated CD14+ monocytes reduces their production of proinflammatory cytokine TNF-α,26 therefore altering their immunomodulatory properties. In addition, the partial reduction of IL-10 expression by monocytes upon the addition of 1-MT suggests that other MSC-secreted factors are involved in monocyte reprogramming.
These observations raise an important consideration in the interpretation of literature interrogating the in vitro immune biology of human MSC. The use of responder T cells is a widely used assay system to quantify human MSC suppression as quality control for studies as an experimental system to interrogate hypothesis-driven investigation. However, we here showed that the use of PBMC, in contrast to purified T-cells, or monocyte-depleted PBMC, may lead to dramatically different results in vitro. Indeed, a retrospective analysis of human MSC literature and conclusions drawn thereof may need to be re-examined critically based on the type of responder cell system utilized as part of the study and may provide some insights on the conflicting variance at times highlighted in the field regarding mechanism of action of MSC on human immune effector cells in vitro.
These data add an interesting perspective on the potential mechanism leading to immunosuppressive effect of MSC in vivo. Striking results obtained in clinical trials using only 1–2 million MSC/kg, could also be explained by the “chain reaction ” effect of MSC on surrounding immune cells. The conversion of monocytes into M2 immunosuppressive macrophages and the generation of Tregs are likely to amplify the overall suppressive effect of MSC injected on T cell proliferation. With this in mind, the use of human MSC for clinical applications could be further optimized. By selecting “universal ” MSC donors with highest expression of IDO combined with cytokine preactivation of the MSC before their administration, the immunosuppressive effect of MSC could be enhanced in order to achieve superior efficacy of MSC-based immunotherapeutic applications. Furthermore, in a “personalized ” cell therapy scenario, where autologous or donor selected MSC are used, the pretreatment analysis of the immune plasticity of MSC in response to a set panel of stimulatory cytokines may help predict and correlate response to defined effector pathways such as IDO induction.
Human MSC. Human MSC were isolated from bone marrow aspirates collected from the iliac crest of consenting patients (donor 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, and 311) undergoing hip replacement surgery. Bone marrow aspirates were diluted in equal volume of phosphate-buffered saline and layered unto a Ficoll density gradient to i0solate mononuclear cells. Mononuclear cells were thereafter plated in complete human MSC medium (α-MEM, 20% fetal bovine serum, 20 mmol/l l-glutamine, and 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin) at high density. Nonadherent hematopoietic cells were removed by changing the medium after 5 days of culture and MSC were split every week and reseeded at 200 cells/cm2. Cell number increased about 40–60-fold at every passage. After the third passage, the MSC cultures were assayed by flow cytometry analysis for the absence of CD45+ and CD31+ contaminating cells and expression of CD44, CD73, CD90, and CD105 (BD Bioscience, St Jose, CA) and subjected to a differentiation assay toward adipocyte and osteocyte lineages, as described.27 All assays were performed using MSC between passage 3 and 5 in order to eliminate any residual hematopoietic cells and avoid senescence.
Human PBMC. Human PBMC were isolated from leukapheresis obtained from healthy volunteers using a Ficoll density gradient. Subsequent isolation of T cells and monocytes were performed by using CD3+ and CD14+ negative selection kits (StemCell Technologies, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada), respectively. Monocyte depletion in PBMC was done using a CD14+ depletion kit (StemCell Technologies).
Reagents. Recombinant human IFN-γ and TNF-α were purchased form R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN) and used at 10 and 3 ng/ml for cell activation, respectively. Neutralizing antibodies against human IL-6, IL-10, and TGF-β were from R&D Systems and were used at doses ranging from 20 to 100 µg/ml, as indicated. Antihuman CD3 and CD28 from BD Bioscience were used both at 0.2 µg/ml. Indomethacin and 1-MT were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO) and used at either 10 µmol/l (diluted in dimethyl sulfoxide) and 1 mmol/l (diluted in 0.1 N NaOH), respectively. CFSE purchased form Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA) was used at 5 µmol/l.
Western blot. Whole cell protein extracts isolated from nonactivated MSC and MSC activated with a combination of IFN-γ and TNF-α for 24 hours were run on a 12% Tris–glycine gel and transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane using the Bio-Rad electrophoresis systems. Proteins were detected using primary rabbit antihuman IDO, rabbit antihuman phospho-STAT-1, goat antihuman total STAT-1 (1:1,000; R&D Systems), and rabbit antihuman GAPDH antibodies (1:1,000; Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Santa Cruz, CA) and corresponding horseradish peroxidase-coupled secondary antibodies (1: 10,000; Santa Cruz Biotechnologies). Protein bands were revealed using ECL system (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway, NJ). Densitometry analysis of the protein bands was performed using Adobe Photoshop 7.0, which attributed an approximate mean intensity value and number of pixels to each band. Absolute intensity was obtained by multiplying the mean intensity value by the amount of pixels. Relative intensity was thereafter calculated by dividing the absolute intensity values of IDO or phospho-STAT-1 by the absolute intensity values of their corresponding GAPDH or total STAT-1 control band. Correlation between IDO relative intensity of each MSC donor and their percentage of T cell proliferation inhibition was established using a linear regression model and a statistical correlation analysis with GraphPad Prism 5 software.
Real-time quantitative PCR. DNA-free total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy kit with DNase digestion (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Two microgram of RNA was reverse transcribed with the MuLV reverse transcriptase (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA) using the random hexamers in the presence of RNase inhibitor. An aliquot of 1/100th of the resulting complementary DNA was used for PCR amplification in a 20-µl reaction volume. Real-time quantitative PCR assays were performed in duplicate on an ABI 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR system thermal cycler and SYBR Green Mastermix (Applied Biosystems). Human primer sequences (5′-3′ forward, reverse) were IL-10: GGCGCTGTCATCGATTTCTT, GGCTTTGTAGATGCCTTTCTCTTG; TGF-β: CGCGCATCCTAGACCCTTT, CTGTGGCAGGTCGGAGAGA; IDO: GCCCTTCAAGTGTTTCACCAA, CCAGCCAGACAAATATATG CGA; COX2: CTGCTCAACACCGGAATTTT, GTGCACTGTGTTTGGA GTGG, and 18S: TTACCAAAAGTGGCCCACTA, GAAAGATGGTGAA CTATGCC. Data was analyzed using the relative quantification method (based on the relative expression of target gene mRNA versus 18S mRNA levels as a reference). Specificity of PCR amplification was tested by melting curve analysis. The absence of genomic DNA contamination was demonstrated by analysis of PCR performed with total RNA and with each of the primer sets.
T cell proliferation assay. CFSE-labeled PBMC were cultured at 400,000 cells/well in 24-well plate with naive or preactivated (IFN-γ or/and TNF-α overnight) MSC at ratio MSC:PBMC of 1:3, 1:9, and 1:27 in R10 (RPMI, 10% FBS, 100 U/ml of penicillin/streptomycin), as indicated. Stimulation of the T lymphocytes was induced by adding 0.2 µg of antihuman CD3 and CD28 antibodies to the coculture. Where indicated, purified monocytes, indomethacin, 1-MT, anti-IL-10 antibody (20 µg/ml) and anti-TGF-β antibody (20 µg/ml) were added to the coculture. T cell proliferation was determined 4 days later by flow cytometry analysis of CFSE fluorescence intensity. T cell activation was also determined by measuring IL-2 and IFN-γ level in supernatants by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. To assay cell toxicity of indomethacin and 1-MT on MSC, an MTT assay (Promega, Madison, WI) was performed on the MSC only after 4 days in culture with the inhibitors. Cell toxicity of all inhibitors used was also tested on activated CFSE-labeled PBMC only and toxicity was determined by measuring inhibition in the level of cell proliferation. No significant cell toxicity was reported with any of the inhibitors used at the indicated concentration with either the MSC or PBMC.
MSC cocultures with purified monocytes and/or T lymphocytes. MSC/monocytes/T cell coculture was conducted in the same manner as the proliferation assay. MSC (133,333 cells), CD14+ monocytes (52,000 cells) and CD3+ T cells (350,000 cells) were cultured in 24-well plate in various combinations with anti-CD3 and CD28 antibodies with or without 1-MT for 4 days and level of IL-10 in the supernatants was analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (R&D Systems). M2 macrophage phenotype analysis was performed by flow cytometry analysis for CD14 and CD206 double positive staining.
Flow cytometry analysis. The following antibodies specific for human molecules were used: anti-CD14, -CD31, -CD44, -CD45, -CD73, -CD90, -CD105, and -CD206 (BD Bioscience).
Statistical analysis. Data are reported as mean ± SD. All calculations were carried out using GraphPad Prism software (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Comparisons between groups were made by ANOVA and correlation between T cell proliferation and IDO expression was done using one-tailed Pearson's test. P values: ns, P > 0.05; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001.
Figure S1. Human MSC characterization.
Figure S2. Immune factors mRNA expression in IFN-γ and TNF-α-activated MSC.
Figure S3. Cytokine-activated MSC generate inducible CD4+/CD25+/Foxp3+ regulatory T cells.
Figure S4. IL-10 is not involved in the immunosuppressive effect of MSC in vitro.